Each candidate for partisan o ce may state a
political party that he or she prefers. A candidate’s
preference does not imply that the candidate is
nominated or endorsed by the party, or that the
party approves of or associates with that candidate.
 e election for President and Vice President
is di erent.  ose candidates are the o cial
nominees of their political parties.
Washington has a new election system. In each
race for partisan o ce, the two candidates who
received the most votes in the August Primary
advanced to the November General Election. It
is possible that the two candidates in a race will
prefer the same party.
STATE OF WASHINGTON
November 4, 2008 General Election
PUBLISHED BY THE OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE
AND KING COUNTY ELECTIONS EDITION 15B
VOTERS’PAMPHLET
2
 Sincerely,
SAM REED
 Secretary of State
Secretary of State Voter Information Hotline (800) 448-4881
TDD/TTY Hotline for the hearing or speech impaired (800) 422-8683
Visit our online voters’ guide at www.vote.wa.gov
Congratulations to Natasha Graves, age 10, of Tacoma whose artwork
is displayed on the cover of this Voters’ Pamphlet.
Sincerely,
SHERRIL HUFF
Director
King County Elections
This is truly an exciting time to be a voter in Washington State.
Our 2008 General Election marks the fi rst time since 1952
with no incumbents in the race for the White House, and we
in Washington will choose statewide elected leaders and the
members of Congress, legislators, judges and local offi cials
who will lead us during this pivotal moment in our history.
You will play a central role in deciding our future.
We have just concluded our fi rst use of the voter-approved Top 2
Primary that produced the slate of candidates you see on these
pages. Voters have chosen fi nalists based on their favorite for
each partisan offi ce, without regard to party preference. You
will note that candidates describe their party preference, but
this doesn’t mean that the party endorses or identifi es with the
candidate. The Top 2 Primary was not a nominating process,
but rather a way for voters to winnow the fi eld for each offi ce
to two fi nalists. In some cases, fi nalists may share the same
party preference. Minor-party candidates were part of the
primary process.
Now it’s your opportunity to pick the winners!
As your chief elections offi cial, I want to assure you that
our elections process has seen dramatic improvement since
2004, when we had the closest race for governor in history,
and unprecedented scrutiny. There have been 180 changes to
state election law and 1,100 administrative rule changes, all
designed to give you confi dence in the accuracy and integrity
of this process we all hold dear. The most striking improvement
was creation of a statewide voter registration database that has
greatly improved our ability to keep voter registration records
current and accountable. Today, voter rolls are the cleanest
they have ever been.
As a voter you now have more information than ever before.
Visit us online at www.vote.wa.gov for a variety of resources.
Click on MyVote to get customized voting information. Study
this Voters’ Pamphlet and check out the Video Voters’ Guide
and our new “I Will Vote” feature.
Thanks for participating!
It’s your choice … it’s your voice! Dear King County Voter:
A lot has changed since the last presidential election. King County
Elections has worked hard since then to implement more than
300 reforms and recommendations resulting from outside audits,
best practices, and the innovative work of elections staff. With
these changes and 20 successful elections behind us, King County
is prepared for the November 4 General Election. Whether you
are a voter, candidate running for offi ce or an elected offi cial,
everyone with a stake in our system of democracy is well served
by the safeguards in place to protect every vote.
I encourage you to read the information in this Voters’ Pamphlet
to make sure you are prepared to cast your ballot. In addition
to information about candidates and ballot measures, you will
fi nd more information about accessible voting options, programs
offered by King County Elections as well as our future plans to
transition to vote by mail. There are also tips for fi lling out and
returning your mail ballot.
If you are a poll voter, November 4 will be the last time you
will visit your polling place to vote. I urge you to join me in
giving thanks to the dedicated people who have worked as poll
workers. Also, be sure to confi rm the location of your polling
place online before you vote on November 4, as many polling
places have changed since 2004. Beginning in February 2009,
King County will conduct all elections by mail. You will receive
a letter from our offi ce in the mail in January about this change.
Visit www.kingcounty.gov/elections or call (206) 296-VOTE for
more information.
Absentee voters have another secure option for returning their
ballot with the installation of ten secured, 24-hour ballot drop
boxes throughout the county. You can also return your ballot at
any neighborhood polling place on Election Day. The ten ballot
drop box locations are listed inside this pamphlet.
Remember, every vote makes a difference. Be an informed voter
and be sure to vote on Tuesday, November 4.
Introduction to the
 2008 General Election Voters’ Pamphlet
3
Help America Vote Act Information
Need More Information?
For more information about the ACP and the phone number of victim resources in your community, call
the ACP toll-free at (800) 822-1065, TDD/TTY at (800) 664-9677 or visit www.secstate.wa.gov/acp .
If you are a victim of domestic violence, sexual assault, trafficking, or stalking who has chosen not to register
to vote because you are afraid your perpetrator will track you down through voter registration records, the
Office of the Secretary of State has a program that might be able to help you. The Address Confidentiality
Program (ACP) works together with community domestic violence and sexual assault programs in an effort
to keep crime victims safer. The ACP provides participants with a substitute mailing address that can be
used when the victim conducts business with state or local government agencies. The ACP also provides
participants with the option of confidential voter registration. All ACP participants must be referred to the
program by a local domestic violence or sexual assault advocate who can help develop a comprehensive
safety plan.
Under Section 402(a)(2) of the Help America Vote Act of 2002 (HAVA), P.L. 107-252 and Washington Administrative Code,
Chapter 434-263, any person who believes that a violation of any provision of Title III of HAVA has occurred, is occurring,
or is about to occur, may file a complaint with the Office of the Secretary of State. A complaint form can be found at
www.secstate.wa.gov/elections/reform_federal.aspx or a letter containing the following information will be considered
an acceptable complaint.
A. Person making complaint
Name, address, city, state, ZIP, county, and home and work phone numbers
B. Description of the alleged violation
Please identify:
1. The facts of the alleged violation;
2. Witnesses, if any, and contact information if you have it;
3. Date and time you became aware of the alleged violation;
4. Location where the alleged violation occurred;
5. Who is responsible for the alleged violation; and
6. Other information that you think will be helpful in resolving your complaint.
All complaints must be notarized and filed with the Office of the Secretary of State no later than 30 days after the certification
of the election. Send complaint to: Secretary of State, Elections Division, PO Box 40229, Olympia, WA 98504-0229.
Address Confidentiality Program
Table of Contents
Ballot Changes .......................................................................4
Voting in Washington State ....................................................5
Washington State Elections.....................................................6
Public Access to Campaign Spending.....................................7
Ballot Measure Process...........................................................8
Do You Know What They Do? ...............................................9
Initiative Measure 985 ..........................................................11
Initiative Measure 1000 ........................................................17
Initiative Measure 1029 ........................................................21
Complete Text of the Measures ............................................25
U.S. President and Vice President.........................................48
U.S. Congressional Office.....................................................56
State Executive Offices ........................................................58
Legislative Offices............................................................................68
What You Should Know About Judicial Offices...................77
Judicial Offices......................................................................78
King County Charter Amendments.......................................84
Sound Transit ........................................................................92
Complete Text of King County Charter Amendments..........94
Complete Text of Sound Transit .........................................101
City of Seattle .....................................................................104
King County General Information......................................120
Register to Vote...................................................................128
Electoral College.................................................................129
Washington State Election Trends......................................130
County Elections Departments ..........................................131
Voter Participation in Presidential Election Campaigns......132
Absentee Ballot Application ..............................................132
4
What is “Party Preference”?
Each candidate for partisan offi ce may state a
political party that he or she prefers.
A candidate’s preference does not imply that the
candidate is nominated or endorsed by the party,
or that the party approves of or associates with that
candidate.
Candidates may choose not to state a political party
preference.
Candidates in the General Election
In each race, the two candidates who received the
most votes in the August Primary will appear on
your November General Election ballot.
Presidential Election
The election for President and Vice President is
different. Presidential candidates are the offi cial
nominees of their political parties.
Why Washington has a Top 2 Primary
In 2004, Initiative 872 proposed a Top 2 Primary.
Washington voters overwhelmingly approved
I-872 but in 2005, the U.S. District Court ruled
that it was unconstitutional. The U.S. Supreme
Court overturned the lower court’s ruling on March
18, 2008. The 2008 August Primary was the fi rst
statewide primary in which Washington State voters
used the new Top 2 method.
Need more information?
For more information on Washington State’s new election system, call the Offi ce of the Secretary of State Voter Information Hotline
at (800) 448-4881, TDD/TTY at (800) 422-8683, or visit www.vote.wa.gov .
Take a look at these important
Ballot Changes
Changes to the Ballot
As a result of Washington’s new Top 2 Primary,
your ballot for the 2008 November General
Election will be different from previous years.
Here are two changes you will see:
• Candidates’ stated party preference; and
• Only two candidates in each partisan race.
NOTE: It is possible that the two
candidates advancing to the General
Election in a race will prefer the
same party.
Sample ballot:
State of Washington
Partisan Offi ce
Legislative Position
Juanita Fernandez
(Prefers Sample Party)
Jamal Carver
(Prefers Sample Party)
Washington State’s New Election System
Washington has a new election system. In each race for partisan offi ce, the two candidates who received the
most votes in the August Primary advanced to the November General Election.
5
Voting in Washington State
Voter Qualifi cations
To register to vote, you must be:
• A citizen of the United States;
• A legal resident of Washington State;
• At least 18 years old by Election Day; and
• If you have been convicted of a felony in Washington,
another state, or in federal court, you lose your right
to vote in Washington State until your civil rights are
restored.
In Washington State, you do not declare political party
membership when you register to vote.
Registration Deadlines
While you may register to vote at any time, keep in mind
that there are registration deadlines prior to each election.
You must be registered at least 30 days before an election
if you register by mail or online. If you are a new voter in
Washington State, you may register in person at your county
elections department up to 15 days before an election.
The phone number and address of your county elections
department are located in the back of this pamphlet.
How to Register to Vote
Forms are available on the Internet at www.vote.wa.gov
or at your county elections department, public libraries,
schools, and other government offi ces. You may also
request a form through the State Voter Information Hotline.
(See Services and Additional Assistance on this page.)
Keep Your Voter Registration Up-to-Date
If your voter registration record does not contain your
current name or address, you may not be able to vote. You can
use the online or mail-in voter registration form to let your
county elections department know when you move or change
your name. Update your record online or download a form
at www.vote.wa.gov . You must re-register or transfer your
registration at least 30 days before the election to be eligible
to vote in your new precinct.
Absentee Ballots
Absentee ballot requests must be made to your county
elections department (not the Secretary of State). No absentee
ballots are issued on Election Day except to a registered voter
who is a resident of a health care facility. A ballot may be
requested in person, by phone, mail, electronically or by a
member of your immediate family as early as 90 days before
an election.
You may also apply in writing to automatically receive an
absentee ballot before each election. An absentee ballot
request form is in this pamphlet. If you have already
requested an absentee ballot or have a permanent request for
a ballot on fi le, please do not submit another application.
You will receive your absentee or mail-in ballot approximately
14 days prior to the election. Upon receipt, vote your ballot.
Please do not attempt to vote again at your polling location.
Absentee and mail-in ballots must be signed and postmarked
or delivered to your county elections department on or before
Election Day.
Election Dates and Poll Hours
The General Election is November 4, 2008. Polling place
hours in King and Pierce Counties are 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Services and Additional Assistance
Contact your county elections department for help with voting
your ballot or fi nding your polling location. The phone number
and address of your county elections department is located in
the back of this pamphlet.
Contact the Offi ce of the Secretary of State for:
• Voters’ Pamphlets in other formats (Braille, audio
cassette, large print) or languages (Spanish, Chinese);
• Lists of initiatives and referenda; and
• Voter registration, voting, and absentee ballot information.
This information is also available at www.vote.wa.gov or call
the Voter Information Hotline, (800) 448-4881 (TDD/TTY for
the hearing- or speech-impaired only is (800) 422-8683).
Already registered? Check online to be sure!
Go to www.vote.wa.gov and click on the MyVote logo
Did you know that if you are already registered to vote, you should submit a new voter
registration form when you move or change your name? Your previous voter registration may
still be active!
Now you may view your personalized voting information using MyVote. Review your sample
ballot, your voting history, ballot drop-off locations and poll sites, and change your address.
 
6
Accurate. Transparent. Accessible.
Washington State Elections
Washington State elections have undergone dramatic
changes in recent years. Here are just some of the
improvements from the most comprehensive set of election
reforms in Washington State history.
S   
In 2006, Washington State’s 3.3 million voter registrations
were combined into a single database. Consolidating all
39 counties considerably improved the ability to search
for duplicate registrations, felons, and deceased voters.
A V U
Accessible Voting Units are available in every county
beginning 20 days before each election. Voters with
disabilities are now able to independently cast secret
ballots and may verify that their selections have been
recorded properly by a paper audit trail.
B 
Previously, votes that could not be tabulated were
“enhanced” by darkening voters’ marks. Now a duplicate
ballot must be created by teams of two election workers,
or referred to the county canvassing board.  e original
ballot is not altered.
A 
Washington State used to hold its Primary in September,
making it one of the latest in the United States. Moving
the Primary to August now allows more time for ballots
to reach military personnel and overseas residents, and
gives election workers more time to prepare for the
November General Election.
C  
 e O ce of the Secretary of State is now authorized
to audit county election practices and procedures every
three years.
V 
State law now requires voters to provide
identi cation at the polls.
O  
Citizens who have a Washington State driver’s license
or state identi cation card may now register online.
To safeguard the accuracy and integrity of electronic
applications, security measures similar to what banks and
retailers use for online  nancial transactions are in place.
V  
 irty-seven of Washington’s 39 counties now vote
entirely by mail. Voting by mail is secure. Each signature
is checked against the signature in the voter registration
 le. If the signature doesn’t match, the vote isn’t counted
until the voter is contacted and the signature is veri ed.
S      
Voters o en make mistakes or do not follow directions
when marking their ballots. Statewide standards have
been implemented for consistent counting of ballots for
all voting systems.  e standards determine what marks
may or may not be counted as votes.
7
Public Access to Campaign Spending Reports
Contributions to Candidates
and Political Committees
No person may make contributions to a state legislative
candidate that exceed $800 per election in which the
candidate’s name is on the ballot. Contributions to state
executive candidates may not exceed $1,600 in the primary
and $1,600 in the general election. A person may give
unlimited funds to the exempt activities account of a political
party, to ballot issue committees, or to other political
committees. During the 21 days before the general election,
however, a person may contribute no more than $5,000 to
a local or judicial office candidate, political party, or other
political committee. Contributions from corporations, unions,
businesses, associations, and similar organizations are
permitted, subject to limits and other restrictions.
Registration and Reporting by
Candidates and Political Committees
No later than two weeks after an individual becomes a
candidate or a political committee is organized, a campaign
finance registration statement must be filed with the Public
Disclosure Commission (PDC) and the county elections
department. (Committees that form within three weeks of
the election must register within three business days.) The
candidate or committee treasurer is also required to report
periodically the source and amount of campaign contributions
over $25 and to list campaign expenditures. The occupation
and employer of individuals giving more than $100 to a
campaign must also be identified.
These reports may be inspected and copied at the PDC’s
Olympia office, the county elections department in the
county where the candidate lives, and on the Internet (www.
pdc.wa.gov). Every candidate and political committee
participating in the election must make their campaign
books and records available for public inspection, by
appointment, during the eight days before the election except
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. Use the contact
information provided on the campaign registration to make
an appointment.
Independent Campaign Expenditures
Anyone making expenditures totaling $100 or more in
support of or in opposition to a state or local candidate
or ballot measure (not including contributions made to a
candidate or political committee) must file a report with
the PDC and their county elections department within five
days. Forms are available from the PDC and the county
elections department, or can be downloaded from the PDC
website. Finally, all political advertising must identify the
person paying for the ad and may be required to include
other information. Expenditures for independently sponsored
political advertisements that cost $1,000 or more and
appear during the last three weeks before an election must
be reported to the PDC within 24 hours of when the ad is
first presented to the public. Sponsors of electioneering
communications must electronically report expenditures
within 24 hours of the communication being presented to
the public. More information about independent ads and
electioneering communications is available from the PDC.
Federal Campaigns
Contributions to U.S. Senate and House of Representatives
candidates are regulated by federal law. An individual may
contribute a maximum of $2,300 in the primary and $2,300
in the general election to each candidate for U.S. Senator and
U.S. Representative. Corporations and unions are prohibited
from contributing from their general treasury funds to federal
campaigns. Contributions may be made from separate
segregated funds (also called political action committees or
PACs). Copies of the federal campaign finance reports are
available from the Federal Election Commission (FEC).
 Need More Information?
Contact the Public Disclosure Commission at 711 Capitol Way, Room 206, PO Box 40908, Olympia, WA 98504-
0908, or by phone (360) 753-1111, email pdc@pdc.wa.gov , or www.pdc.wa.gov . For federal campaigns, contact the
Federal Election Commission by phone at (202) 694-1100, toll-free (800) 424-9530, TDD/TTY (202) 219-3336, or visit
www.fec.gov .
The Ballot Measure Process
The Initiative
The initiative process is the direct power of the voters to enact
new laws or change existing laws. It allows the electorate
to petition to place proposed legislation on the ballot. The
initiative’s only limitation is that it cannot be used to amend the
Washington State Constitution.
There are two types of initiatives:
Initiatives to the People - Initiatives to the people, if
certified to have sufficient signatures, are submitted for
a vote of the people at the next state general election.

Initiatives to the Legislature - Initiatives to the
Legislature, if certified, are submitted to the Legislature
at its regular session each January. Once submitted,
the Legislature must take one of the following three
actions:
1) Adopt the initiative as proposed, in which case it
becomes law without a vote of the people;
2) Reject or refuse to act on the proposed initiative, in
which case the initiative must be placed on the ballot
at the next state general election; or
3) Approve an amended version of the proposed
initiative, in which case both the amended version and
the original version must be placed on the ballot at the
next state general election.
Any registered voter, acting individually or on behalf of an
organization, may propose an initiative to create a new state law
or to amend or repeal an existing statute.
To certify an initiative (to the people or to the Legislature), the
sponsor must circulate the complete text of the proposal among
voters and obtain a number of legal voter signatures equal to
8 percent of the total number of votes cast for the office of
Governor at the last regular gubernatorial election.
Initiative measures appearing on the ballot require a simple
majority vote to become law (except for gambling or lottery
measures which require 60 percent approval).
The Referendum
Washington’s referendum process is intended to give voters an
opportunity to have the final say regarding laws either proposed
or approved by the Legislature. The only acts that are exempt
from the power of referendum are emergency laws — those
that are necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health or safety, and the support of state government and
its existing institutions.
There are two types of referenda:
Referendum Bills - Referendum bills are proposed
laws referred to the electorate by the Legislature.
Referendum Measures - Referendum measures are
laws recently passed by the Legislature that are placed
on the ballot because of petitions signed by voters.
Any registered voter, acting individually or on behalf of an
organization, may demand, by petition, that a law passed by
the Legislature be referred to a vote of the electorate prior to its
going into effect (emergency legislation is exempt from the
referendum process — see above).
To certify a referendum measure to the ballot, the sponsor must
circulate among voters the text of the legislative act to be referred,
and obtain a number of legal voter signatures equal to 4 percent
of the total number of votes cast for the office of Governor at
the last regular gubernatorial election.
A referendum certified to the ballot must receive a simple
majority vote to become law (except for gambling and lottery
measures which require 60 percent approval).
Please Note: The preceding information is not intended as a
substitute for the statutes governing the initiative and referendum
processes, but rather should be read in conjunction with them.
Relevant sections of law are found in Article 2, Section 1 of
the Washington State Constitution, Chapter 29A.72 RCW
and WAC 434-379. To access these sections online, visit the
Code Reviser’s website at www.leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser . A
complete handbook for filing initiatives and referenda is online
at www.secstate.wa.gov/elections/pdf/Filing_Initiative_and_
Referenda_Manual_2005-2008.pdf .
The Washington State Constitution affords voters two basic methods of direct legislative power — the initiative and the
referendum. While differing in process, both initiatives and referenda have the same effect of leaving the ultimate authority
to legislate in the hands of the people.
8
9
Voters are entrusted to elect candidates into many offices, perhaps without always knowing the qualifications and full
responsibility of an office. Following are the descriptions for some of the offices appearing on your ballot.
Do you know what they do?
President/Vice President
Under the U.S. Constitution, the President must be at least
35 years old and a native-born citizen of the United States. The
President’s term of office is four years; no person may serve
more than two consecutive terms as President.
The President’s functions, powers, and responsibilities are
defined by Article II, Section 1 of the Constitution. The chief
duty is to ensure that the laws are faithfully executed, and this
duty is performed through a system of appointed executive
agencies that includes cabinet-level departments. The President
appoints all the cabinet heads and most other high-ranking
officials of the executive branch of the federal government.
The President also nominates all judges of the federal judiciary,
including the members of the Supreme Court; nominees are
subject to confirmation by the Senate. The President is the
commander in chief of the nation’s armed forces, in times of
peace as well as war. The President has the power to make
treaties with foreign governments, though the Senate must
approve such treaties. Finally, the President has the power to
approve or reject (veto) the laws passed by Congress.
The Constitution stipulates that the Vice President shall
become President in the event the President dies, resigns, or
is removed from office. The Vice President also serves as the
presiding officer of the U.S. Senate.
U.S. Representative
The U.S. Constitution prescribes that a Representative must
be at least 25 years of age, have been a citizen of the United
States for seven years, and, when elected, be a resident of the
State from which he or she is chosen. A Representative’s term
of office is two years; the total membership of the House is
elected in even-numbered years.
The Constitution assigns the Senate and House equal
responsibility for declaring war, maintaining the armed forces,
assessing taxes, borrowing money, minting currency, regulating
commerce, and making all laws necessary for the operation of
the government.
Governor
The Governor is the chief executive officer of the state,
elected to serve a four-year term. The Governor’s executive
branch responsibilities include appointing the heads of
departments, agencies, and institutions. The Governor’s
legislative responsibilities include reporting to the Legislature
annually on affairs of the state and submitting a budget
recommendation. The Governor may veto legislation passed
by the Legislature.
The office was created by Article III, Section 2, of the
Washington Constitution. The Governor’s powers and duties
are outlined in Section 5-13 of the Constitution and RCW
43.06.
Lieutenant Governor
The Lieutenant Governor is elected independently of the
Governor and holds office for four years. The Lieutenant
Governor acts as Governor if the Governor is unable to perform
his/her official duties, and is the presiding officer of the State
Senate.
The Lieutenant Governor is elected to a four-year term.
The office was created by Article III, Section 16 of the State
Constitution.
Secretary of State
The Secretary of State is the state’s chief elections officer,
chief corporation officer, supervises the State Archives,
and oversees the State Library. Primary functions include
supervising state elections and certifying election results;
filing and verifying initiatives and referendums; publishing
the state voters’ pamphlet; registering and licensing corporations,
limited partnerships and trademarks; registering charitable
organizations; collecting and preserving historical records of
the state; administering the state’s Address Confidentiality
Program; and filing official acts of the Legislature and
Governor.
 The Secretary of State is elected to a four-year term. The office
was created by Article III, Section 17 of the State Constitution.
The duties are outlined in RCW 43.07.
State Treasurer
As the state’s fiscal officer, the State Treasurer’s principal
duties are to manage and disperse all funds and accounts; be
responsible for the safekeeping and interest on all state
investments; accounting for and making payments of interest
and principal on all state bonded indebtedness and maintaining
a statewide revenue collection system for the purpose of
expediting the deposit of state funds into the Treasury.
The State Treasurer is elected to a four-year term. The
office was created by Article III, Section 19 of the State
Constitution. The duties are outlined in RCW 43.08.
State Auditor
Working with more than 2,600 state and local governments,
the State Auditor’s Office conducts independent financial,
accountability, and performance audits of all Washington
governments. The State Auditor conducts investigations of state
employee whistleblower assertions about state agencies and
also investigates reports of fraud, waste, and abuse received
through its citizen hotline. Audit and investigation results
are documented and reported to governments and the public.
The State Auditor is elected to a term of four years. The office
was created by Article III, Section 20 of the State Constitution.
The duties are outlined in RCW 43.09 and 43.88.160.
State Executive Offices
Federal Offices
Attorney General
The Attorney General serves as legal counsel to the Governor,
members of the Legislature, state officials, and more than
230 state agencies, boards and commissions, colleges and
universities. The office also represents the various administrative
agencies and schools in court or administrative hearings. The
Office of the Attorney General enforces consumer protection
statutes and serves the public directly by providing information
on consumer rights and fraudulent business practices.
The Attorney General is elected to office for a four-year term.
The office was created pursuant to Article III, Section 21 of
the Washington State Constitution. The duties are outlined in
RCW 43.10.
Superintendent of Public Instruction
As head of the state educational agency and chief executive
officer of the State Board of Education, the Superintendent
is responsible for the administration of the state kindergarten
through twelfth grade education program. The regulatory
duties of the office include certification of teaching personnel,
approval and accreditation of programs, and apportionment
of state and local funds. The Superintendent also provides
assistance to school districts’ school improvement area; in
statistical analysis, accounting, management, assessment, and
curriculum development.
The Superintendent is elected to a four-year term of office.
The office was created pursuant to Article III, Section 22 of
the Washington State Constitution. The duties are outlined in
RCW 28A.300.
Commissioner of Public Lands
The Commissioner of Public Lands is the head of the
Department of Natural Resources, overseeing the management
of 5 million acres of forest, agricultural, range, tidal, and shore
lands of the state. Subject to proprietary policies established
by the Board of Natural Resources, the Commissioner is
responsible for the exercise of all duties and functions of the
department.
The Commissioner is elected to a four-year term of office.
The office was created pursuant to Article III, Section 23 of
the Washington State Constitution. The duties are outlined in
RCW 43.12 and RCW 43.30.
Insurance Commissioner
The Office of the Insurance Commissioner regulates
insurance companies doing business in Washington, licenses
agents and brokers, reviews policies and rates, examines the
operations and finances of insurers, and handles inquiries and
complaints from the public.
The Insurance Commissioner is elected to a four-year term
of office. The office was created by the Legislature and the
duties are listed in RCW 48.02.060 and 48.43.
State Executive Offices (continued)
State Senator
The State Constitution prescribes that a Senator must be a
citizen of the United States and a qualified voter in the legislative
district from which he or she was chosen. A Senator’s term of
office is four years; the Senate is made up of 49 members,
one from each legislative district in the state. One-half of the
membership of the Senate is elected at the General Election
held in November of each even-numbered year.
During legislative sessions, the Legislature is called upon to:
enact or reject legislation affecting public policy in the state;
provide for the levy and collection of taxes and other revenue
to support state government and assist local government; and
appropriate funds for these purposes.
State Representative
The State Constitution prescribes that a Representative
must be a citizen of the United States and a qualified voter
in the legislative district from which he or she was chosen. A
Representative’s term of office is two years; the House is made
up of 98 members, two from each legislative district in the state.
The total membership of the House is elected at the General
Election held in November of each even-numbered year.
During legislative sessions, the Legislature is called upon to:
enact or reject legislation affecting public policy in the state;
provide for the levy and collection of taxes and other revenue
to support state government and assist local government; and
appropriate funds for these purposes.
How Candidates’ Names Appear on the Ballot
The order in which candidates’ names appear on your ballot
is established by state law or codes.
For the general election, the names of candidates for President
and Vice President are placed in order of the political party
which received the highest number of votes in Washington
State’s previous Presidential Election or, in the case of
independent or minor party candidates, in the order of their
qualification with the secretary of state (Chapter 29A.36.161,
Revised Code of Washington). The names of candidates for all
other state offices are ordered according to the number of votes
those candidates received in the primary (Chapter 434-230-
045(2)(b), Washington Administrative Code). For the primary,
a lot draw was conducted to determine the order of candidates’
names on the ballot (Chapter 434-230-045(2)(a), WAC).
Political party preferences stated by the candidates do not
affect the order in which they are listed on any ballot (Chapter
434-230-045(2)(c), WAC).
Legislative Offices
10
11
Official Ballot Title:
Fiscal Impact Statement
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
➥
Note: The Official Ballot Title was written by the Attorney General as required by law. The Explanatory Statement was
written by the Attorney General as required by law. The Fiscal Impact Statement was written by the Office of Financial
Management. For more in-depth fiscal analysis, visit www.ofm.wa.gov/initiatives . The complete text of Initiative
Measure 985 begins on page 25.
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
 Yes [ ] No [ ]
Initiative Measure No. 985 concerns transportation.
This measure would open high-occupancy vehicle lanes to all traffic during specified hours,
require traffic light synchronization, increase roadside assistance funding, and dedicate certain
taxes, fines, tolls and other revenues to traffic-flow purposes.
Should this measure be enacted into law?
Proposed I-985 Fiscal Impact Statement
Over five years, approximately $622.6 million would be redirected from projects and activities supported by state and local general
and transportation funds to congestion relief activities. This would include $224.2 million for opening carpool lanes to general traffic
during off-peak hours, $65.7 million for synchronizing traffic lights, $18 million for additional emergency relief and $1.4 million
for the State Auditor to monitor performance. The remaining $312.9 million would be available for other congestion relief activities,
including expanding road capacity. Funds would not be allowed for bike paths, landscaping, wildlife crossings, park and ride lots,
ferries, trolleys, buses or rail.
General Assumptions
o Estimates are based upon such sources as trends, current appropriation levels and the last legislatively adopted 16-year
transportation financial plan.
o The following have been excluded from this analysis:
o Most federal funds, as they have regulations that govern their use.
o Revenues dedicated to outstanding bonds, as they are pledged for specific purposes.
o Tolling authority for the Tacoma Narrows Bridge, as it is in a different chapter of the law than the statutes amended in
the initiative.
o Toll rate increases, which are not considered “new tolls or charges.”
o Funds appropriated to agencies for distribution as grants, as opposed to direct appropriations for specific projects.
Revenue Assumptions
Estimated Revenues Deposited into the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account
Fiscal Year 2009 to 2013
 Biennium
 2007-09 2009-11 2011-13 Total
 Red Light Traffic Cameras $ 13,043,998 $ 13,383,998 $ 13,383,998 $ 39,811,994
 Transportation-Related Public Works Projects 0 4,921,505 3,895,273 8,816,778
 Sales and Use Taxes on Motor Vehicles 52,453,000 237,965,000 283,526,000 573,944,000
 Toll Revenues 0 0 0 0
 Total Revenue $ 65,496,998 $ 256,270,503 $ 300,805,271 $ 622,572,772

Proposed by Initiative Petition
12
Fiscal Impact Statement (continued)
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
➡
Red Light Cameras Revenue Assumptions
o Presently, no counties and 12 cities have automated traffic safety camera programs.
o Revenues decrease after the first year of use because the number of traffic violations typically decreases following the
first year of installation. Estimated revenues assume a 70 percent collection rate.
Transportation-Related Public Works Projects Revenue Assumptions
o One-half of 1 percent of state appropriations for “transportation related public works projects” would be deposited into
the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account. This requirement affects “… all state agencies, including all state departments,
boards, councils, commissions, and quasi-public corporations …” This pertains to state entities only.
o Transportation-related public works projects would not be subject to the one-half of 1 percent allocation for public art.
Sales and Use Tax Revenue Assumptions
o The 2007–09 revenues represent seven months of collections. Future biennia represent 24 months of collections and
growth, as forecast by the Economic and Revenue Forecast Council.
Toll Revenue Assumptions
o Toll revenues would be used for “construction, operation and maintenance” of toll facilities.
o Operation of toll facilities includes Washington State Patrol enforcement, tow truck operations, emergency response and
routine maintenance.
o Tolls may be collected prior to the construction of a toll facility as long as the revenue is for the anticipated expenses
identified in a capital or financial plan.
o All projected toll revenues would be planned to be used for operations, maintenance and construction of toll facilities, so
there would be no excess revenue assumed to be available for deposit to the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account.
Assumptions on Costs to Implement I-985
Estimated Expenditures From the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account
Fiscal Year 2009 to 2013
 Biennium
 2007-09 2009-11 2011-13 Total
 Traffic Light Synchronization $ 20,935,000 $ 20,935,000 $ 23,870,000 $ 65,740,000
 Red Light Traffic Cameras 14,640 0 0 14,640
 Carpool Lanes 200,000 30,000,000 194,000,000 224,200,000
 Sales and Use Taxes on Motor Vehicles 27,000 0 0 27,000
 Washington State Auditor 200,000 600,000 600,000 1,400,000
 Department of Transportation Audit Support 50,000 100,000 100,000 250,000
 Emergency Roadside Response 5,636,500 6,190,800 6,190,900 18,018,200
 Total Expenditure $ 27,063,140 $ 57,825,800 $ 224,760,900 $ 309,649,840
Traffic Light Synchronization -- Cost to Implement Assumptions
o One-half of the signals would be synchronized in 2009 and one-half in 2010.
o Synchronization would need to be recalibrated every 2 ½ to 3 years.
o The estimated number of signalized intersections in cities is 3,734. At an average cost of $5,000 per intersection, the
total cost to synchronize all intersections for cities would be $18.7 million, with an additional cost of $18.7 million for
recalibration.
o Approximately 362 signalized intersections are on heavily traveled arterials and streets in King, Pierce, Snohomish and
Clark counties. At an average cost of $5,000 per intersection, the total cost to synchronize all intersections for these counties
would be $1.8 million, with an additional cost of $1.8 million for recalibration.
o Approximately 405 signalized intersections are on heavily traveled arterials and streets on state-owned highways. At an
average cost of $8,500 per intersection, the total cost to synchronize all intersections on state highways would be $3.4
million, with an additional cost of $3.4 million for recalibration. The Washington State Department of Transportation
estimates an additional cost of up to $18 million for the state-owned highways only.
o Costs to take full advantage of real-time synchronization, such as staffing of traffic operations centers and traffic cameras,
are not included.
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements. 13
➥
Fiscal Impact Statement (continued)
Carpool Lanes -- Cost to Implement Assumptions
Opening carpool lanes to general purpose traffic during off-peak hours requires:
o Installation or modification of variable speed limit and lane use control systems for 50 miles of HOV lanes at approximately
$4 million per mile, for a total of $200 million over five years.
o Installation of access ramp gates and electronic signing at eight locations, estimated at about $2 million per location, for
a total of $16 million over five years.
o Installation of additional ramp meters, at a cost of $6 million over five years.
o Replacement of 700 HOV signs to comply with requirements, at a cost of $2.2 million.
o Implementation would be staged over the five years, in part due to the need to obtain federal approval to make changes
to HOV lanes.
o King County Metro estimates that opening carpool lanes to general purpose traffic would reduce efficiency of transit vehicles
by about 10 percent. King County’s cost is estimated to be approximately $15 million over five years, due primarily to
additional fuel and labor costs. Impact to other transit districts has not been assessed, but is assumed to be the equivalent
of the King County impact.
State Auditor -- Cost to Implement Assumptions
o The State Auditor’s Office would incur a one-time cost of $100,000 to $200,000 to develop the benchmarks and best
practices required, and annual monitoring and reporting costs of $200,000 to $300,000.
o The Department of Transportation would incur costs to support the State Auditor’s work, at a cost of $50,000 per year.
Emergency Roadside Assistance -- Cost to Implement Assumptions
o Although I-985 requires additional funds to be spent on emergency roadside assistance, it does not specify how much of
an increase is expected. For the purpose of this analysis, additional funds are assumed to be provided to the Washington
State Department of Transportation and the Washington State Patrol.
o The Washington State Department of Transportation estimates include an additional 10 emergency roadside assistance
vehicles and 10 full-time equivalent employees (FTEs) to respond to 17,978 incidents per biennium.
o The Washington State Patrol estimates include 13 more troopers in the central Puget Sound Region; three more FTEs
to improve accident investigations, enforcement, education and coordination with other jurisdictions; and additional
equipment for troopers and investigation staff.
Assumptions related to fund shifts and revenue losses
o Estimated revenue loss to cities from red light traffic camera infractions would be $40 million over five years.
o Not charging tolls during off-peak hours on SR-167 HOT lanes would result in a 33 percent loss of funds, or a total loss
of $3.1 million over five years.
o Washington state transit agencies are estimated to lose about $20 million over five years in federal transit funds due to the
opening of carpool lanes to general traffic during non-peak periods.
o The Washington State Arts Commission would lose $500,000 over five years.
o The state general fund would be reduced by $573.9 million over five years. The general fund is used for education, public
safety, social services and general government.
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
14
The law as it presently exists:
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
Explanatory Statement
➡
The effect of the proposed measure, if approved:
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
Existing law authorizes the state department of transportation and local governments to reserve all or any portion of a highway
under their respective jurisdictions for the exclusive or preferential use of public transportation vehicles or private motor
vehicles carrying no fewer than a specified number of passengers. These restricted lanes are typically called “carpool lanes”
or “high occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes.” The standard for restricting roads, ramps, or lanes for this purpose is whether the
limitation “will increase the efficient utilization of the highway or will aid in the conservation of energy resources.” Using this
standard, the department of transportation and local governments may determine which highways, ramps, and lanes will be
reserved and what restrictions will be applied to particular sections of roadway.
The department of transportation is authorized to establish a pilot project of high-occupancy toll lanes on State Route 167 in
King County. The department is authorized to establish and to automatically adjust toll charges for use of these lanes and to
change the toll charge by time of day, level of traffic congestion, vehicle occupancy, or other appropriate criteria. Revenue
from the high-occupancy toll lanes is deposited in an account in the state treasury and may be spent only as appropriated by
the legislature. Existing law authorizes use of the funds for toll lane purposes and certain other purposes, and provides that a
reasonable proportion of the funds will be used to improve transit, vanpool, carpool, and trip reduction services in the State
Route 167 corridor.
Under existing law, the state levies and collects a tax on each retail sale in the state equal to 6.5% of the selling price and an
additional tax of three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) on each retail sale of a motor vehicle (but not retail car rentals). Existing
law does not require that any specific portion of this tax revenue be set aside for traffic congestion purposes.
Existing law authorizes the use of automated traffic safety cameras for issuance of notices of traffic infractions in certain
circumstances. Revenue from infractions based on the use of traffic safety cameras is deposited into the current expense fund
of the county or city using the camera.
Under existing law, all state agencies are required to set aside one-half of one percent (0.5%) of any appropriation for the
original construction of any public building for the acquisition of works of art. These funds are expended by the state arts
commission. The works of art may be placed on public lands or may be included in exhibitions in public facilities. The arts
program does not include appropriations for buildings of a temporary nature.
The state transportation commission is authorized to determine and establish tolls and charges for the use of toll bridges and
other toll facilities, including Washington state ferries. Tolls and revenues received from the operation of any toll bridge
constructed with the proceeds of bonds are paid over to the state treasurer and deposited in trust funds set apart from all other
funds. Such funds shall be applied for the payment of principal and interest of bonds. If the bond contracts do not require
surplus revenues to be held in any particular manner, they are held and used for other purposes incidental to the construction,
operation, and maintenance of the toll bridge or bridges for which the bonds were sold.
This measure would restrict the authority of the department of transportation and of local governments to define carpool lanes
and to determine how to manage their use. The measure would define “carpool lanes” to include high-occupancy vehicle
lanes, including express lanes, high-occupancy toll lanes, off-ramp bypass lanes, and on-ramp bypass lanes on any highway,
freeway, or roadway in the state. The measure would define the term “peak hours” to include the hours between 6:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. and the hours between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. All other hours would be defined as “nonpeak hours.” The measure would open all carpool lanes (as defined) during non-peak hours for use by all traffic otherwise
lawfully abiding by the rules of the road. During peak hours, the use of carpool lanes would be limited to motor vehicles
carrying two or more persons, or motorcycles carrying one or more persons. Tolls could not be charged on any vehicle in a
high-occupancy toll lane during non-peak hours.
The measure would require cities and counties to synchronize the traffic lights on heavily-traveled arterials and streets within
their jurisdictions to optimize traffic flow. The state and other local governments would be required to synchronize traffic on 
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements. 15
Explanatory Statement (continued)
➥
heavily-traveled arterials and streets falling within their respective responsibilities. The state auditor would be directed to
identify and establish performance benchmarks on traffic light synchronization and to investigate and track progress on these
benchmarks.
The measure would direct the department of transportation and other governmental entities to rapidly respond to traffic
accidents and other obstructions on highways, roads, and streets, and to clear these accidents and obstructions as expeditiously
as possible. The state auditor would be directed to identify and establish performance benchmarks on this requirement and to
investigate and track progress on these benchmarks.
A portion of the revenues collected through the levy of the state sales tax (15% of the amount of sales tax revenue collected
from the sale of motor vehicles, except for retail car rentals) would be placed in a Reduce Traffic Congestion Account
established by the measure.
In addition to the sales revenues, the following revenues would be placed in the new account: certain tolls and charges;
revenue from certain infractions dedicated to reducing traffic congestion; and one-half of one percent (.05%) of the money
appropriated for any transportation-related public works project. (Funds previously dedicated to the acquisition of art for
such projects would be redirected to use for traffic congestion.) Revenue from infractions detected with the use of automated
traffic safety cameras would also be deposited in the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account.
Moneys in the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account could be spent only after appropriation, and could be used for only the
following purposes: to pay for costs associated with the opening of carpool lanes to all traffic during non-peak hours; to
pay for costs associated with synchronizing traffic on heavily-traveled arterials and streets; to provide increased funding for
emergency roadside assistance; to provide funding for the activities of the state auditor in implementing the measure; and to
otherwise reduce traffic congestion. However, the fund could not be used for creating, maintaining, or operating bike paths or
lanes, wildlife crossings, landscaping, park and ride lots, ferries, trolleys, buses, monorail, light rail, or heavy rail.
The measure would limit the use of revenue from new tolls and charges on bridges and other toll facilities. Except for tolls
relating to the Washington state ferries, revenue from new tolls that exceeds the cost of construction, operation, or maintenance
of toll facilities and new capital improvements to highways, freeways, roads, bridges, and streets, would be deposited in the
Reduce Traffic Congestion Account and spent in accordance with the above-described purposes of that account.
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
16 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
Voters’ Pamphlet Argument Prepared by: Voters’ Pamphlet Argument Prepared by:
Statement For Initiative Measure 985 Statement Against Initiative Measure 985
I-985 IMPLEMENTS COMMON SENSE REFORMS BASED
ON RECOMMENDATIONS FROM STATE AUDITOR
BRIAN SONNTAG’S THOROUGH INVESTIGATION
Requiring local governments to synchronize traffic lights on
heavily-traveled arterials and streets – this single reform reduces
traffic congestion 6-7%. Clearing out accidents faster – absolutely.
Opening carpool lanes to everyone during non-peak hours – it’s
what other states do and illustrates that increased capacity reduces
congestion. But politicians arrogantly refuse to implement ANY
of Auditor Sonntag’s recommendations.
STATE AUDITOR BRIAN SONNTAG’S 2007 REPORT:
“CITIZENS HAVE IDENTIFIED CONGESTION AS A
PRIORITY, AND THEREFORE …
… SO MUST THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND THE LEGISLATURE.” Democrat Sonntag’s performance audit on transportation reported 80% of citizens wanted
“reducing traffic congestion” to be the top transportation priority.
Taxpayers pay billions in taxes and fees every year – they expect
their money to strongly support the people’s top transportation
priority: reducing the time it takes to drive our vehicles from
point A to point B. Sonntag’s audit and I-985 advocate getting
better use from existing streets and highways while also addressing chokepoints with increased capacity to significantly reduce
travel times for everyone. Approving I-985 tells politicians that
voters want this approach.
I-985 DEDICATES EXISTING TRANSPORTATIONRELATED REVENUES THAT ARE CURRENTLY BEING
DIVERTED TO NON-TRANSPORTATION SPENDING
I-985 DOESN’T RAISE TAXES, instead it dedicates red light
camera profits, a small portion of vehicle sales taxes, and “1/2% for
reducing congestion” for any transportation-related project (removes
“1/2% for public art”) to reducing congestion. I-985 guarantees that
tolls won’t be diverted to non-transportation spending, dedicating
it instead to its project. And I-985 empowers Auditor Sonntag to
track revenues and expenditures, helping implement I-985’s reforms
and reporting regularly to the public on its progress.
WASHINGTON’S THE 5TH HIGHEST TAXED STATE IN
THE NATION – I-985 KEEPS US FROM HITTING #1
Taxpayers are tapped out. I-985 tells politicians to prioritize,
spending what we already pay more effectively. Vote Yes.
For more information, visit www.ReduceCongestion.org or
call (425) 493-8707.
ERMA TURNER, beauty shop owner, gathered 3,288 signatures, Cle Elum;
STEVEN BENCZE, retired warehouseman, fisherman/hunter, gathered
2,567 signatures, Othello; ERIC PHILLIPS, hiker, label company owner,
gathered 2,255 signatures, Everett; KAREN CURRY, housewife, husband Lee
(plumber), gathered 1,789 signatures, Yakima; ANDRE GARIN, retired postal
worker, bowler, gathered 1,469 signatures, Vancouver; MIKE DUNMIRE,
husband, community leader, retired businessman, initiative volunteer, Woodinville.
VOTE NO ON I-985 BECAUSE IT TAKES AWAY MONEY
FROM THINGS WASHINGTON RESIDENTS
BADLY NEED.
I-985 is really about shortchanging local communities and
working families, not relieving congestion. I-985 siphons more than
$600 million in sales taxes over 5 years, from taxpayers all across
the state, to pay for a handful of mostly Seattle-area highways.
Paying for I-985 will either require new taxes, or cuts in schools,
criminal justice, and other priorities. The state is already facing a
budget deficit. I-985 makes a bad situation worse. Bad idea. Vote
no.
I-985 INCREASES THE COST OF TRANSPORTATION
PROJECTS IN EVERY PART OF THE STATE.
I-985 takes half a percent of state money from transportation
projects everywhere in Washington for a special fund that won’t
benefit local traffic. Local communities will have to pay more to
make up the difference.
People from the four corners of the state shouldn’t pay more for
road projects only where congestion is worst. Unfair. Vote No.
SOUND BITES DON’T FIX TRAFFIC: INDEPENDENT
TRAFFIC ENGINEERS THINK THAT I-985 COULD
MAKE CONGESTION WORSE.
I-985 orders big changes that haven’t been thought through or
tested. For example: it would open up city bus-only lanes to cars.
That would complicate traffic and make bus trips slower.
Worse, I-985 could create new crash hazards. Left-hand freeway
ramps designed only for high occupancy vehicles would be open to
more traffic, risking unexpected backups, accidents, and even ramp
closures to preserve safety. Don’t make traffic worse. Vote no.
I-985 DOESN’T TELL YOU EXACTLY HOW AND
WHERE CONGESTION FUNDS WILL BE SPENT.
I-985 creates a new pot of money, but doesn’t say specifically
how it will be used. Initiatives shouldn’t be vague on what will be
done with your money. Demand accountability. Vote no.
For more information, visit www.NoOn985.com or call
(877) 871-8051.
JOHN STANTON, businessman and civic leader on transportation reform;
CAROL MOSER, State Transportation Commission (own, not Commission,
behalf), Richland; DOUG MACDONALD, former Secretary, Washington
State Department of Transportation; CARY BOZEMAN, Mayor, City of
Bremerton, former Mayor, Bellevue; MIKE O’BRIEN, Chair, Sierra Club
Cascade Chapter; DENIS HAYES, environmental leader and co-founder of
Earth Day.
Rebuttal of Statement For
Rebuttal of Statement Against
Opponents’ proposals force taxpayers to pay more – I-985
forces politicians to spend existing revenues more effectively,
implementing immediate, cost-effective solutions.
Sonntag hired world-class transportation experts – their
professional, independent analysis showed Sonntag’s reforms will
reduce congestion 15-20%, provide $3 billion boost to our state’s
struggling economy BENEFITING EVERYONE. I-985’s opening
HOV (express, carpool, bus-only) lanes during non-peak hours
reduces congestion.
Tell politicians: don’t take more from taxpayers, adopt Sonntag’s
growing list of audit recommendations.
Don’t be fooled. I-985 Actually Makes Traffic Worse.
Read Auditor Sonntag’s Report!
His experts didn’t recommend monkeying with carpool lanes.
Or taking taxes from other programs to spend on a few highway
projects. (Besides, art funding’s a myth; state highway money
doesn’t go to art!)
With I-985, taxpayers pay more and transportation actually gets
worse.
Join traffic experts, mayors, educators, and business, civic and
union leaders. Reject bad tax policy and backwards traffic ideas.
Vote No!
17
Official Ballot Title:
Fiscal Impact Statement
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
➥
Note: The Official Ballot Title was written by the Attorney General as required by law. The Explanatory Statement was
written by the Attorney General as required by law. The Fiscal Impact Statement was written by the Office of Financial
Management. For more in-depth fiscal analysis, visit www.ofm.wa.gov/initiatives . The complete text of Initiative
Measure 1000 begins on page 33.
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
 Yes [ ] No [ ]
Initiative Measure No. 1000 concerns allowing certain terminally ill competent adults to obtain
lethal prescriptions.
This measure would permit terminally ill, competent, adult Washington residents, who are
medically predicted to have six months or less to live, to request and self-administer lethal
medication prescribed by a physician.
Should this measure be enacted into law?
Fiscal Impact Statement for Initiative 1000
Initiative 1000 would require health care providers writing a prescription or dispensing medication under this act to file a copy of the
dispensing record with the Washington State Department of Health. The Department would be required to create and make available
to the public an annual statistical report of information collected. The Department would adopt rules on the process for collecting
this information. One-time rule-making costs are estimated at $60,000. Ongoing data collection and reporting costs are estimated at
$19,000 per biennium. Total costs for the 2009–11 biennium are $79,000.
Assumptions for Fiscal Analysis of Initiative 1000
The Department of Health will incur one-time costs in fiscal year 2010 for rulemaking. This includes the cost of conducting three
rule-making hearings across the state, associated staff and related expenses, meeting room rentals, Office of Attorney General services,
travel, printing and postage. Rule-making costs are estimated at $60,000.
Starting in fiscal year 2010, the Department of Health would have ongoing costs for staff required to collect and report the data
identified in section 15 of this act. Staff and associated costs are estimated at $19,000 for the 2009–11 biennium.
Proposed by Initiative Petition
18
The law as it presently exists:
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
Explanatory Statement
➡
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
Under existing Washington law, it is a crime for any person, including a physician, to knowingly assist another person in
attempting suicide. Knowingly causing or aiding another person to attempt suicide is a class C felony. Washington’s Natural
Death Act states that nothing in that Act shall be construed to condone, authorize, or approve mercy-killing or physicianassisted suicide, or to permit any affirmative or deliberate act or omission to end life other than to permit the natural process of
dying. Death certificates are required to state the cause of death within the best knowledge or belief of the attending physician
or medical attendant, or the health officer, coroner, or prosecuting attorney having jurisdiction. A physician or other medical
license holder who is convicted of a felony related to the practice of the person’s profession is subject to professional discipline,
including license suspension or revocation.
This measure would allow a terminally ill, competent, adult Washington resident who is medically predicted to have six
months or less to live, to request and self-administer lethal medication prescribed by a physician. The attending physician
with primary responsibility for care of the patient would be required to determine that the patient has an incurable, irreversible
disease expected to cause death within six months; that the patient is competent; that the patient has demonstrated Washington
residency; that the request is voluntary; and that the patient is making an informed decision. A second, consulting physician,
would be required to confirm that the patient is terminally ill, competent, and has made an informed and voluntary decision.
The measure defines competent as having the ability to make and communicate an informed decision to health care providers.
The measure defines an informed decision as a qualified patient’s decision to request and obtain a lethal prescription, based on
an appreciation of the relevant facts and after being fully informed by the attending physician of his or her diagnosis, prognosis,
the risks and probable result of ingesting the medication, and feasible alternatives.
The attending physician would be required to recommend that the patient notify the patient’s next of kin, but the patient would
not be required to do so. If the attending or consulting physician believes the patient’s judgment may be impaired by a psychiatric
or psychological disorder or depression, the physician would be required to refer the patient to a psychiatrist or psychologist
for counseling. Lethal medication could not be prescribed until the counselor determines that the patient’s judgment is not
impaired. Immediately before writing the prescription, the attending physician would be required to verify that the patient is
making an informed decision.
The measure would require a patient to make one written and two oral requests to the attending physician for the lethal
medication. The patient would have the right to rescind the request at any time, and in any manner, regardless of his or her
mental state. The physician would be required to offer the patient an opportunity to rescind the request when the second oral
request is made. A 15-day waiting period between the first and second oral requests would be required, and a 48-hour waiting
period between the written request and the writing of the prescription would be required. The measure would require that the
written request of the patient be substantially in a form contained in the measure. The form includes a statement that the patient
is of sound mind and is making a voluntary request, has a terminal disease, has been informed of the likely effect of taking
the lethal medication and feasible alternatives, that the patient understands the right to rescind the request at any time, and an
indication of whether the patient’s family has been informed.
Two persons would be required to witness the patient’s written request and to attest that, to the best of their knowledge, the
patient is competent, acting voluntarily, and not being coerced. The measure would require that one witness not be a relative; not
be the patient’s attending physician; not be entitled to a portion of the patient’s estate; and not own, operate, or be employed by
a health care facility where the patient is a patient or resident. If the patient is an inpatient at a health care facility, one witness
would be required to be designated by the facility. The measure would require attending physicians to document compliance
with its requirements.
Persons participating in good faith compliance with the measure, including being present when a qualified patient takes the
prescribed lethal medication, would not be subject to criminal or civil liability, or professional disciplinary action. Any person
who willfully alters or forges a request for lethal medication without the patient’s authorization, conceals or destroys a rescission
The effect of the proposed measure, if approved:
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements. 19
Explanatory Statement (continued)
➥
with the intent to cause the patient’s death, or coerces or exerts undue influence on a patient to request lethal medication or
destroy a rescission, would be guilty of a class A felony.
Provisions in wills, contracts, or agreements purporting to affect the ability to make or rescind a request for lethal medication
would be invalid. Life, health, or accident insurance or annuity policies, and rates charged for them, could not be conditioned
on or affected by making or rescinding a request for lethal medication. A qualified patient’s ingestion of lethal medication would
have no effect on a life, health, or accident insurance or annuity policy.
The measure would not require a health care provider or facility that is unable or unwilling, to provide a prescription for
lethal medication. If a health care provider or facility is unable or unwilling to carry out a qualified patient’s request for lethal
medication, and the patient transfers his or her care to a new provider, the prior provider would be required to transfer a copy of
the patient’s relevant medical records to the new health care provider, upon the patient’s request. With advance notice, a health
care facility that chooses not to participate under this measure may prohibit other health care providers from participating on
the facility’s premises.
The measure would not prevent a health care provider from participating in the measure while acting outside the provider’s
capacity as an employee or independent contractor. In addition, the measure would not authorize a health care provider or
facility to sanction a physician or counselor for making an initial determination that a patient has a terminal disease; informing
the patient of the medical prognosis; providing information about the measure at the patient’s request; or providing information
regarding this measure or a referral to another physician at the patient’s request.
State reports would refer to practices under the measure as obtaining and self-administering life-ending medication, and not as
suicide or assisted suicide. The patient’s death certificate would be required to list the underlying terminal disease as the cause
of death.
The state Department of Health would be required to annually review all records maintained under the measure and to adopt
rules for collecting information relating to compliance with the measure. Health care providers that prescribe or dispense lethal
medication under the measure would be required to file a report with the Department of Health. Information collected by the
Department of Health would not be public. The Department of Health would be required to annually produce a public statistical
report of collected information.
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
20 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
Voters’ Pamphlet Argument Prepared by: Voters’ Pamphlet Argument Prepared by:
Statement For Initiative Measure 1000 Statement Against Initiative Measure 1000
GOVERNOR BOOTH GARDNER (D); GOVERNOR DANIEL J.
EVANS (R); TOM PRESTON, MD; DOROTHY H. MANN, PhD,
M.P.H.; REV. BRUCE PARKER, D. Min.; LINDA N. OLSON, PhD,
RN.
I-1000 legalizes assisted suicide in Washington. The law is
flawed and dangerous.
I-1000 IS DANGEROUS FOR PEOPLE WHO CANNOT
AFFORD HEALTH CARE.
Adding I-1000 to our broken, profit-driven health care system
puts Washingtonians at risk – anyone with limited access to health
care or inadequate health insurance. In Oregon, patients have been
denied chemotherapy but offered assisted suicide instead.
I-1000 HAS NO REAL SAFEGUARDS.
I-1000 requires almost no government oversight, with no
penalties for abuse. It overrides our disclosure laws and requires
doctors to falsify death certificates.
I-1000 endangers vulnerable people. Its supposed “safeguards”
are inadequate:
• Depressed and mentally ill people can be given lethal
drug overdoses.
• Spouses and children need never be told a loved one is
being given a lethal drug overdose.
• There is no protection against coercion or financial
pressures.
OUR STATE’S LEADING PHYSICIANS’
ORGANIZATION, THE WASHINGTON STATE MEDICAL
ASSOCIATION, STRONGLY OPPOSES I-1000.
Proponents say I-1000 provides a choice when dying, but for
those who are not wealthy, it could be a choice made by insurers and
state bureaucrats; they will have the choice to steer patients toward
assisted suicide rather than provide actual end-of-life care.
DISABILITY COMMUNITY LEADERS OPPOSE I-1000.
Recent medical advances assure pain can be controlled and no
one need suffer at the end of life. I-1000 is not needed.
Dangerous assisted suicide laws have been rejected in 24
states, including here in Washington in 1991. It’s time to reject
assisted suicide, again.
VOTE “NO” ON I-1000. IT’S JUST TOO DANGEROUS.
For more information, visit www.noassistedsuicide.com or
call (206) 337-2091.
MARGARITA PRENTICE, State Senator and nurse; CYNTHIA
MARKUS, MD, President, Washington State Medical Association;
DUANE FRENCH, disability rights leader, Not Dead Yet –
Washington; ROSE CRUMB, RN, hospice nurse, founder Volunteer
Hospice of Clallam County; DAVID CORTINAS, publisher of LaVoz
Hispanic Newspaper; LINDA SEAMAN, MD, FAAHPM, board
certified hospice and palliative medicine.
Rebuttal of Statement For Rebuttal of Statement Against
Suffering, terminally ill adults should have the right to make
their own end-of-life choices.
Opponents of I-1000 – funded largely by one religious group
– want to impose their views on everyone.
Independent studies of Oregon’s law show no abuse (www.
oregon.gov./DHS).
No one is forced to use it.
I-1000 has the same safeguards as Oregon’s law.
The Washington Public Health Association, American Medical
Women’s Association, thousands of doctors, nurses, disabled
people, clergy, citizens and patients endorse I-1000.
The truth: Assisted suicide in Oregon isn’t dignified. And its
safeguards don’t work.
Credible studies show end of life suffering has increased, not
decreased in Oregon. Depressed and confused people have been
coerced into assisted suicide there.
No wonder The Oregonian calls the law: “rigged to avoid
finding answers.” (3/8/05)
I-1000 offers even fewer protections than Oregon’s law.
Washington’s voters do want to decide difficult end-of-life
questions themselves.
That’s why they’ll vote NO on I-1000.
YES ON I-1000: IT’S MY DECISION
A YES vote FOR I-1000 allows mentally competent,
terminally ill adults with six months or less to live to receive
– under strict safeguards – a prescription for life-ending
medication. This choice belongs exclusively to the terminally
ill individual. Government, politicians, religious groups and
others should not dictate these personal decisions.
TEN YEARS OF DIGNITY IN OREGON
I-1000 mirrors an Oregon law that has been in place for over
10 years. The Oregon law was upheld by the U.S. Supreme
Court and approved twice by voters.
Earlier this year, The Oregonian newspaper wrote that the
law “helped elevate end-of-life care” and that “in a decade of
experience with the law, no abuses have shown up.” The Seattle
Times added that “those it affects, and their families, will be
thankful for its passage.”
Independent studies of Oregon’s Death with Dignity law
prove that the safeguards protect patients, prevent misuse and
coercion, and allow mentally competent, terminally ill patients
the option of a peaceful, dignified death. People with terminal
cancer and AIDS would have the right to decide whether to end
their intolerable suffering.
SAFEGUARDS WORK
There are multiple safeguards in Washington’s death with
dignity law. These safeguards include independently witnessed
oral and written requests, two waiting periods, mental
competency and prognosis confirmed by two physicians, and
self-administration of the medication. Only the patient – and no
one else – may administer the medication.
YES ON I-1000: DEATH WITH DIGNITY
I-1000 asks, “Who should decide these difficult end-of-life
questions?” We say the decision belongs with the patient and
their family, and no one else.
For more information, visit www.yeson1000.org or call
(206) 633-2008.
21
Official Ballot Title:
Fiscal Impact Statement
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
➥
Note: The Official Ballot Title was written by the Attorney General as required by law. The Explanatory Statement was
written by the Attorney General as required by law. The Fiscal Impact Statement was written by the Office of Financial
Management. For more in-depth fiscal analysis, visit www.ofm.wa.gov/initiatives . The complete text of Initiative
Measure 1029 begins on page 40.
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
 Yes [ ] No [ ]
Initiative Measure No. 1029 concerns long-term care services for the elderly and persons with
disabilities.
This measure would require long-term care workers to be certified as home care aides based on
an examination, with exceptions; increase training and criminal background check requirements;
and establish disciplinary standards and procedures.
Should this measure be enacted into law?
Fiscal Impact Statement for Initiative 1029
Beginning January 1, 2010, 75 hours of training would be required for most long-term care workers, up from a maximum of 34
hours now required, depending on the worker’s classification. New long-term care workers would have to pass state-financed state
and federal background checks. Any long-term care worker hired to care for elderly or disabled persons whose care is paid for by
the state would have to be state-certified as a home care aide. Approximately 20,000 new long-term care workers are hired each year.
Estimated costs are $651,000 for fiscal year 2009 and $29.7 million for 2009–11.
Assumptions for Fiscal Analysis of Initiative 1029
The number of workers who would receive training was developed using the June 2008 Caseload Forecast Council estimate of the
number of long-term care clients. Current wage information was used as the basis for wage costs, with no inflationary increases
included.
The Department of Social and Health Services would be required to create the curriculum for the 75 hours of required training, with
input from consumer and worker representatives. The training would include five hours of basic safety information and orientation
that must be completed before the long-term care worker begins employment. The remaining 70 hours must be completed within
120 days of the worker being hired and can include 12 hours of structured peer mentoring. Workers would be paid wages for the
time they attend required training classes. The cost of the new training would be $14.8 million for 2009–11. Computer system costs
would be $251,000 in fiscal year 2009 and $6.3 million in 2009–11.
The Department of Social and Health Services would obtain background checks, including fingerprints, at a cost of $2 million in
2009–11. There would be no cost to the worker for background checks. The Department of Health would obtain state background
checks on all applicants and federal background checks on applicants who have criminal records or are from out of state at a cost
of $700,000 in 2009–11. These background checks would duplicate the background checks done by the Department of Social and
Health Services as current state and federal law prohibits agencies from sharing background check information.
There would be exceptions to the 75-hour training requirement. Parents who become individual providers to care for their
developmentally disabled adult child would be required to complete 12 hours of mandatory training, and would be exempted from
the annual continuing education requirement. Individual providers who provide less than 20 hours of care per month and those
who care for their own parent or adult child with long-term care needs other than developmental disabilities would be required to
complete 35 hours of training. These individual providers would be exempted from the annual continuing education requirement
until June 30, 2014.
Proposed by Initiative Petition
22
Fiscal Impact Statement (continued)
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
➡
The law as it presently exists:
Explanatory Statement
Long-term care workers assist the elderly and persons with disabilities in the homes of the people they assist or through
assisted living facilities, adult family homes, or state-licensed boarding homes. Long-term care workers also include respite
care providers, community residential service providers, and any other worker who directly provides home or communitybased services to the elderly or persons with functional or developmental disabilities. Long-term care workers do not include
employees of nursing homes, hospitals or other acute care facilities, adult day care centers, or adult day health care providers.
Assistance by long-term care workers may include help with eating, dressing, bathing, meal preparation, household chores and
other assistance with daily life. Long-term care workers might provide this assistance under a direct contract with the State as
an individual provider, or they might be employees of home care agencies or other facilities.
Long-term care workers are currently required to receive two types of training through the Department of Social and Health
Services. These training programs are referred to as “orientation” and “basic training,” and together comprise approximately
34 hours of training. Orientation must be completed before working with elderly or disabled people, and provides introductory
information about providing care. No test is required after completing orientation. Basic training includes core knowledge and
skills that long-term care workers need to provide personal care services effectively and safely, and must be completed within
120 days after being authorized to provide services. Certain health care workers can instead take a modified form of basic
training. A competency test is required after completing basic training. Long-term care workers are also required to receive
training in first aid and cardio-pulmonary resuscitation. Each year they are also required to fulfill at least ten hours of continuing
education. Parents who receive financial assistance from the State to provide care for their developmentally disabled child are
not subject to those requirements, but must complete a separate six-hour training program.
Under recently enacted laws, some of these training requirements will increase in 2010. These include increasing the requirement
for continuing education from ten to twelve hours each year, and adding a requirement for on-the-job training or peer mentorship
and the opportunity to voluntarily take up to 65 hours of advanced training.
Long-term care workers must also be screened, through a criminal background check, to determine whether they have a criminal
history that would disqualify them from working with vulnerable persons. These checks are performed against Washington
State Patrol records in order to search for criminal convictions in Washington. If the worker has lived in Washington for less
than three years, then a fingerprint-based check is conducted through the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
State law does not require that long-term care workers be licensed or certified by the State.
The Department of Health would certify workers who complete the required training and pass a background check within the first
150 days of employment. This analysis assumes that the Department of Health would set certification fees to cover its program
costs. Fees would be paid by workers applying for certification or renewing their certification. Workers would not be paid for the
time spent taking the certification exam. The costs of preparing and administering the new certification program would be $71,000
in fiscal year 2009 and $3.2 million in 2009–11.
The analysis reflects exceptions to the certification requirement for individuals caring for their parent or adult child and those hired
as an individual provider who works less than 20 hours per month. To maintain certification and employment, a home care worker
would be required to complete 12 hours of continuing education courses each year.
The combined costs for rule making, contract administration and curriculum development for the Department of Health and the
Department of Social and Health Services would be $329,000 in fiscal year 2009 and $2.6 million in 2009-11. The fiscal analysis of
Initiative 1029 does not include any expenses associated with implementation of Chapter 361 of the Laws of 2007, which expanded
training offered to long-term care workers beginning January 1, 2010.
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements. 23
Explanatory Statement (continued)
➥
This measure would require that all long-term care workers for the elderly or disabled hired after January 1, 2010, be certified by the
state Department of Health as a “home care aide” within 150 days of being hired. In order to receive this certification, the worker
would be required to complete 75 hours of training as a home care aide and pass a certification examination.
Long-term care workers would be required to satisfy the minimum training requirements proposed in the measure within 120 days
of employment. All training curriculum would be approved by the state Department of Social and Health Services. The first five
hours of the training would be completed before being eligible to provide care, including two hours of orientation to the role of
the caregiver and three hours of safety training, including basic safety precautions, emergency procedures, and infection control.
The remaining 70 hours would relate to basic training topics, including communication skills, worker self-care, problem solving,
maintaining dignity, consumer directed care, cultural sensitivity, body mechanics, fall prevention, skin and body care, long-term
care worker roles and boundaries, supporting activities of daily living, and food preparation and handling. The training must also
address matters relating to specific populations, such as mental health, dementia, developmental disabilities, young adults with
physical disabilities, and older adults. Individual providers must be paid for time spent in training.
After completing training, the long-term care worker must pass an examination in order to be certified as a home care aide. The
examination must include both a skills demonstration and a written or oral knowledge test.
The measure would provide exceptions to the certification and training requirement. Certain nurses and nursing assistants and
medicare-certified home health aides may receive certification by passing the examination without taking the training and, to the
extent permitted by federal law, certain reciprocity would be required between home care aide certification and nursing assistant
certification. People employed as long-term care workers prior to January 1, 2010, who have completed all current training
requirements, would also be excused from obtaining certification. Also, individuals caring only for their own parent or child, and
long-term care workers employed by supported living providers, need not be certified. Long-term care workers covered by the
certification and training requirements do include only people paid by the State or by a private agency or facility licensed by the
State to provide personal care services.
All long-term care workers would be required to receive at least 12 hours of continuing education training each year in order to retain
a certification. This annual continuing education requirement would not apply to a person caring only for his or her own child.
The measure would affect part-time workers differently than full-time workers. Before January 1, 2014, a person working 20 hours
or less providing care for one person in a calendar month would be required to receive 35 hours of training. Five of those hours must
be completed before providing care, including two hours of orientation training and three hours of safety training. Part-time workers
would also be excused from the annual continuing education requirement until January 1, 2014. The full training requirements of
the measure would apply to these part-time long-term care workers as of January 1, 2014, and the certification requirement would
apply as of July 1, 2014.
The requirement that long-term care workers be screened through criminal background checks would be broadened for all workers
hired after January 1, 2010. The background checks must include checking against FBI fingerprint identification records and against
the national sex offender registry. The State would be required to pay the costs of these background checks.
The measure also includes training requirements for people who receive payments from the State to provide care for certain family
members. Those providing care for their own child or parent, other than to a developmentally-disabled child, must receive 35 hours
of training. Five of those hours must be completed before providing any state-paid care, including two hours of orientation training
and three hours of safety training. Parents who contract through the State to provide care for their developmentally disabled child
would be required to receive 12 hours of training within the first 120 days of so contracting.
The measure would also increase the requirement that the State offer advanced voluntary training for long-term care workers from
65 to 70 hours of voluntary advanced training, by January 1, 2011.
The measure would prohibit the State from paying for long-term care services by providers who do not comply with the requirements
of this measure. It would permit the State to terminate any contracts with providers, or take enforcement actions against providers,
who fail to comply with the measure. The measure would also make certified long-term care workers, and the licensed agencies or
facilities that employ them, subject to State oversight and discipline, including the potential suspension or revocation of certificates
for misconduct.
The effect of the proposed measure, if approved:
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
24 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
Voters’ Pamphlet Argument Prepared by: Voters’ Pamphlet Argument Prepared by:
Statement For Initiative Measure 1029 Statement Against Initiative Measure 1029
All of us want safe, quality care for friends and family who
are elderly, sick, disabled, and vulnerable to injury or abuse. Yet
currently, manicurists and hairdressers have stricter training and
certification requirements than caregivers for elderly relatives and
those with disabilities.
Initiative 1029 will improve long-term care by increasing training
standards, requiring state certification, and mandating FBI criminal
background checks.
I-1029 exempts unpaid providers and those caring for their parents
and children.
YES ON I-1029: IMPROVED TRAINING WILL
MEAN MORE DEPENDABLE CARE FOR
WASHINGTON SENIORS.
Thousands of Washington residents with Alzheimer’s, dementia,
and developmental disabilities receive care in their own homes.
I-1029 will increase training requirements to 75 hours and require
state certification for caregivers — equal to federal standards for
nursing homes.
YES ON I-1029: PROTECT VULNERABLE SENIORS WITH
EXPANDED FBI CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS.
Most caregivers are compassionate, loving professionals but
we’ve all seen headlines about tragic cases of abuse and neglect. For
example, in July caregivers at an Everett adult family home were
arrested for identity theft. They stole thousands from an 83-year
old man with dementia. I-1029 will protect vulnerable seniors by
requiring nationwide FBI background checks.
YES ON I-1029: A SMART INVESTMENT THAT
HELPS SENIORS STAY AT HOME.
Home and community-based care is more cost effective than
expensive institutions, and saves taxpayers’ money. I-1029 is a
responsible investment to ensure that seniors can find trained
caregivers they need to live independently in their own homes.
YES ON I-1029: BACKED BY SENIORS, NURSES,
HOME CARE WORKERS, FIREFIGHTERS, POLICE,
PROSECUTORS, AND SHERIFFS.
I-1029 is based on a bi-partisan compromise worked out to
improve care while controlling costs. It is backed by senior advocates,
thousands of nurses and home care workers, Democratic and
Republican legislators, State Council of Firefighters, Fraternal Order
of Police, and sheriffs and prosecutors across Washington State.
For more information, visit www.yeson1029.org or call
1 (888) 224-3851.
I-1029 SHOULD BE REJECTED – IT HURTS FAMILIES,
CAREGIVERS AND TAXPAYERS.
I-1029 makes it harder for families to provide care for loved
ones. It forces many families to undergo 75 hours of training,
fingerprinting and intensive background checks with FBI and
national sex offender data bases – all before receiving state support
to care for their own children or parents! Training may be difficult
to get, especially in rural areas.
Neighbors and community members providing part-time care
would face the same unnecessary requirements. Many will stop
providing care. There are already shortages of in-home and
community caregivers – we cannot afford to lose more. Non-career
caregivers help keep families together. I-1029 makes it harder to
keep loved ones at home and out of expensive institutional care.
I-1029 DRIVES UP COSTS FOR EVERYONE.
Health care costs are already skyrocketing. It wastes tens
of millions of taxpayer dollars that could provide other vital
services.
Don’t be misled – I-1029 won’t improve care. Background
checks are already required for most caregivers. A governor’s
task force found no evidence that an arbitrary, 75-hour classroom
training standard improves quality. Today, training and supervision
is tailored to the diverse needs of those in our care. I-1029’s rigid
requirements won’t allow that.
DEMOCRATIC AND REPUBLICAN LEGISLATORS
OVERWHELMINGLY REJECTED THESE
PROPOSALS AS UNNECESSARY, INEFFECTIVE
AND TOO EXPENSIVE.
Washington has a quality care system – the National Conference
of State Legislatures named it one of the top three models for other
states to follow.
KEEP FAMILIES TOGETHER! KEEP COSTS LOW!
REJECT I-1029!
For more information, visit www.communitycarecoalitionwa.
org or call 1 (877) 488-8565.
LOUISE RYAN, Washington State Long-Term Care Ombudsman;
NANCY DAPPER, executive director, Alzheimer’s Association of
Western/Central Washington; MARTY LEVINE, MD, Geriatrician,
Medical Chief, Group Health Burien; KAREN KEISER, State Senator,
Chair, Senate Health Care Committee; BLANCHE RAZO, 73, home
care client with lung disease, emphysema; KATHY GOLD, RN, nurse
who inspects long-term care facilities, Everett.
DARLENE STORTI, Board Chair, Aging Services of Washington;
JOE MAYO, President, Home Care of Washington, Spokane; HELEN
SOMMERS, State House of Representatives Appropriations Chair,
Seattle; RON RALPH, member, Advocates for Developmental
Disabilities Choices, parent, Seattle; MARY MARGARET CORNISH,
Chair, Community Residential Services Association, Yakima; CRAIG
FREDRICKSON, member, Governor’s Caregiver Training Workgroup.
Rebuttal of Statement For
Rebuttal of Statement Against
Senior advocates, nurses and home care workers endorse I-1029.
Improved training equals improved care. I-1029 applies to professional
caregivers; 85% of family and intermittent caregivers are exempt.
Police, prosecutors and sheriffs endorse I-1029. It protects seniors
by closing loopholes and requiring nationwide FBI background
checks.
The Governor and legislators including House Republican leader
DeBolt and Senate Democratic Leader Brown endorse I-1029. It
reflects the 85 hour training recommendation of the “Governor’s Task
Force.” http://www.governor.wa.gov/ltctf/default.htm
I-1029 isn’t about improving care. Background checks are already
performed. Training comparisons between jobs are misleading
campaign tactics. Independent studies confirm caregivers are well
trained.
I-1029 improves one special interest’s finances. They’re trying to
write the rules and then get paid by taxpayers to deliver training. We
can’t afford I-1029. By wasting millions on unnecessary training,
I-1029 means less money for solving real problems.
Legislators said no. Reject this self-serving end-run around our
elected officials!
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 25
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
AN ACT Relating to reducing traffic congestion on public
highways, freeways, streets, and roads: amending RCW 46.61.165,
47.66.090, 47.56.403, 82.08.020, 43.17.200, 43.46.090, 47.56.030,
47.56.160, and 47.56.170; reenacting and amending RCW
46.63.110; adding a new section to chapter 35.21 RCW; adding a
new section to chapter 36.01 RCW; adding a new section to chapter
47.01 RCW; adding a new section to chapter 82.12 RCW; adding
a new section to chapter 46.68 RCW; creating new sections; and
providing an effective date.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF
WASHINGTON:
POLICIES AND PURPOSES
NEW SECTION. Sec. 1. During these tough economic times,
the people deserve a common sense proposal to reduce traffic
congestion by implementing basic congestion relief strategies and
improving Washington’s transportation system with better use of
existing public resources.
In 2005, the voters of Washington overwhelmingly approved
Initiative 900 granting the state auditor the power to conduct
independent, comprehensive performance audits of state and local
governments. The auditor was hired by the people to determine
ways for government to deliver services as effectively and
efficiently as possible. Through extensive outreach with citizens,
including focus groups and town hall meetings, in 2006, the
state auditor learned that eighty percent of citizens said reducing
traffic congestion is their number one transportation priority.
Traffic congestion incurs incredible costs to citizens, businesses
and government; it is an important aspect of transportation and
is an indicator of how well the state’s transportation system is
working. Reducing traffic congestion means minimizing vehicle
trip delays, the amount of time it takes a vehicle to get from point
A to point B. So the state auditor contracted with the prestigious
auditing firm of Talbot, Korvola and Warwick, LLP who brought
years of experience in performance auditing. They hired subjectmatter experts with internationally recognized experience in traffic
and congestion management. Members of the audit team had
more than two hundred years’ of cumulative experience auditing
transportation systems. In October 2007, the state auditor released
the results of their independent performance audit report “Managing
and Reducing Congestion.” Their number one finding was that
traffic congestion relief is not a top priority of the department of
transportation so the audit’s fundamental recommendation was:
“Commit to congestion management and reduction as a primary
goal.” The anger, defensiveness, and condescending dismissal of the
report by the department of transportation, the legislature, and the
governor was swift and resolute. The new head of the department
of transportation rejected the recommendations on the day they
were released. House of representatives and senate transportation
committees refused to acknowledge the report or even hold a public
hearing as required under Initiative 900. At the public hearing held
by an unaffiliated legislative committee, legislators lashed out
at the state auditor for even broaching the topic. The governor’s
chief of staff said citizens do not understand transportation and
simply take for granted what government does. Legislators quoted
from statutes that no longer existed to defend the status quo.
Some promised legislative retribution on the state auditor and
interference in future audits, which is illegal under Initiative 900.
The state auditor identified and retained internationally recognized
experts in state, federal and international transportation issues.
Their recommendations are crystal clear. This act provides voters
with the opportunity to implement the strategies recommended in
the report that will have an immediate impact on reducing traffic
congestion using existing infrastructure and resources. Upon its
approval by the voters, it is incumbent upon the department of
transportation, the legislature, and the governor to listen to the
people and make traffic congestion management and reduction the
primary goal of transportation. As State Auditor Brian Sonntag says
in his accompanying letter to the report: “Citizens have identified
congestion as a priority, and therefore, so must the Department
(of Transportation) and the Legislature.” It is clear from the
establishment’s reaction to this transportation performance audit
that the only way for voters to change the attitude of those in power
is to approve this act.
This measure would open carpool lanes during non-peak hours,
require synchronization of traffic lights on heavily-traveled arterials
and streets, increase funding for emergency roadside assistance,
and dedicate a portion of existing vehicle-related revenue for these
purposes.
The intent of sections 2 and 3 of this act: We all pay taxes for
our carpool lanes, so everyone should be allowed to use them at
least some of the time. This act strikes a reasonable balance by
allowing our carpool lanes to be open to everyone during non-peak
hours, meaning midday and evenings on weekdays and all day and
all night on weekends. Existing road capacity must be utilized to
maximize its effectiveness. How can we increase road capacity
and reduce traffic congestion on our most congested highways and
roadways without spending billions of dollars? By opening our
carpool lanes to everyone during non-peak hours. This will quickly,
significantly, and cost-effectively relieve traffic congestion and
increase traffic flow on our most congested highways and roadways
and illustrate that increased road capacity results in reduced traffic
congestion. These sections do not create or impose new tolls on
carpool lanes; but if tolls or charges are imposed on carpool lanes,
then these sections ensure that the toll revenue is used to reduce
traffic congestion.
The intent of sections 4 and 15(1)(b) of this act: due to the
voters’ approval of Initiative 960 in 2007, any tolls or charges
must be decided and approved by a simple-majority vote of the
Legislature, not unilaterally imposed by unelected bureaucrats on
the transportation commission. Such decisions are too important
and too impactful to be made by anyone other than our elected
representatives.
The intent of sections 5 and 6 of this act: To increase traffic
flow and reduce traffic congestion, each city must synchronize the
traffic signals on heavily-traveled arterials and streets within its
jurisdiction. Heavily-traveled arterials and streets include routes
of regional and local significance and include major and secondary
arterials and streets. For heavily-traveled arterials and streets
outside of a city, the county must synchronize the traffic signals. For 
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 26
Complete Text of
heavily-traveled arterials and streets that are the responsibility of the
state or other local government, it is the responsibility of the state
or other local government to synchronize the traffic signals. What
is the use of having a top-notch Medic One system if it simply gets
stuck in traffic? Synchronizing traffic lights ensures increased traffic
flow, reduced traffic congestion, and better safety. Transferring
goods to and from our ports, and other freight mobility necessities,
are hampered by stop-and-go traffic at successive traffic lights.
Reducing traffic congestion and increasing traffic flow is critical for
freight mobility. Synchronization of traffic signals is a coordinated
set of timing plans for a group of signals on arterials and streets
used to facilitate smooth traffic flow. The objective of synchronizing
traffic signals is to allow progression through arterials and streets
with the fewest stops at intersections, while minimizing delay for
the side street. Synchronizing traffic lights creates more uniform
speeds along streets, increases traffic flow, reduces time delays at
intersections, and creates opportunities for traffic from side streets
to safely enter a main street. This act helps cities, counties, and
other governments fund these improvements.
The intent of section 7 of this act: Traffic accidents and other
temporary obstructions greatly hinder the smooth flow of traffic
and must be responded to and cleared as quickly as possible. This
involves coordination, communication, equipment, and manpower.
A blocked highway or roadway can result in miles of backups and
long delays. A large portion of all traffic congestion is caused by
collisions, disabled vehicles, spills, and other events that impede
the normal flow of traffic. An initial incident has the potential for
creating secondary incidents such as vehicles running out of fuel or
overheating, or collisions that occur from lane changing and rapid
braking in the initial incident’s traffic backup. The quicker the initial
incident is cleared, the less time motorists and response personnel
are exposed to traffic hazards and the possibility of a secondary
collision. The Washington state department of transportation and
other government entities and contracted companies, including
tow truck operators, must expeditiously assist in the safe, prudent,
and quick removal of vehicles and other debris involved in traffic
accidents or other temporary obstructions. The people want the
roads cleared and drivers helped as quickly as possible to reduce
traffic congestion and restore the normal flow of traffic. This act
provides increased funding for these programs.
We need to fix what we already have using the taxes we’re already
paying. Taxpayers can’t afford to pay for the mega-platinum option
for every mega-project, especially when it’s simply to satisfy the
aesthetic preferences of Seattle’s elite. A perfect example is the
decade of debate over the Alaska Way viaduct (Highway 99), a
major north-south state highway that everyone is paying for. The
people want practical, pragmatic solutions that will reduce traffic
congestion, not make it worse. Government too often has a kneejerk reaction: If their pick-up truck gets a flat tire, rather than
repairing the tire, they instead replace the pick-up with a Mercedes.
The people want a solution that reduces traffic congestion for the
thousands of vehicles that travel over state highways every day, but
at a minimum, it shouldn’t be made worse. Taxpayers are already
paying billions of dollars in taxes and they expect and demand
improvements now, rather than promises of “less bad” decades
from now. Taxpayers want transparency and accountability with
the focus on solving the problem rather than using the problem to
leverage the public to swallow yet another tax increase. It is way
past time for the people to get something in return for the taxes
they’re already paying.
The intent of sections 8 and 9 of this act: In order to reduce traffic
congestion, it is essential that existing vehicle taxes be spent on
this critical priority. Vehicle purchases generate approximately
$850 million per year in state tax revenue and using 15% of those
revenues to reduce traffic congestion is reasonable and prudent.
People who purchase vehicles want their taxes to go toward
reducing traffic congestion on our roads, streets, and highways at
the state and local level.
The intent of section 11 of this act: To provide additional revenue
for the policy requirements of this act, moneys collected from fines
and civil penalties from red light traffic cameras shall be used to
reduce traffic congestion and increase traffic flow.
The intent of sections 12 through 14 of this act: To provide
additional revenue for the policy requirements of this act, any
transportation-related public works project shall not be required
to spend a percentage of its funds on purchases of art, instead
a percentage will be dedicated to reducing traffic congestion.
Taxpayers don’t have bottomless wallets so every dollar possible
must go toward the people’s top priority: reducing traffic
congestion.
The intent of sections 15 through 17 of this act: These sections do
not create or impose new tolls; but if tolls or charges are imposed,
then these sections ensure taxpayers are protected. There has
been talk of simply charging people extra just to drive on existing
highways, freeways, roads, and streets, including adding global
positioning system (GPS) devices or transponders to vehicles or
other methods to collect revenue. If citizens are double-taxed, then
any tolls or charges will be used to reduce traffic congestion.
Year after year, Washington voters have repeatedly rejected the
business-as-usual, the-only-solution-is-a-tax-increase mentality.
During these tough economic times, the people deserve a common
sense proposal to reduce traffic congestion and increase traffic
flow by implementing basic traffic congestion relief strategies and
improving Washington’s transportation system with better use of
existing public resources.
Reduced traffic congestion ensures a growing, thriving economy
that is essential in generating the tax revenue necessary to fund
government services.
This measure will make travel times faster immediately on our
highways and roadways, reduce traffic congestion, increase traffic
flow, increase safety and freight mobility, and result in fewer
vehicles idling thus decreasing carbon emissions, all by maximizing
the use of existing public resources.
OPENS CARPOOL LANES TO EVERYONE DURING
NON-PEAK HOURS
Sec. 2. RCW 46.61.165 and 1999 c 206 s 1 are each amended
to read as follows:
The state department of transportation and the local authorities are
authorized, subject to the requirements in this section, to reserve all
(continued)
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 27
Complete Text of
or any portion of any highway under their respective jurisdictions
as carpool lanes, including any designated lane or ramp, for the
exclusive or preferential use of public transportation vehicles or
private motor vehicles carrying no fewer than a specified number
of passengers when ((such)) the limitation will increase the efficient
utilization of the highway or will aid in the conservation of energy
resources. Regulations authorizing ((such)) exclusive or preferential
use of a highway facility ((may be declared to be)) are effective ((at
all times or)) only at the specified times of day ((or)) and on the
specified days designated in this section. In order to reduce traffic
congestion, existing road capacity must be utilized to maximize its
effectiveness. On and after December 4, 2008, all carpool lanes shall
be opened during non-peak hours for use by all traffic otherwise
lawfully abiding by the rules of the road of this state, including
RCW 46.61.100. This policy shall be in effect for any carpool lane
in effect on January 1, 2008, and for any new or expanded carpool
lanes designated after January 1, 2008, on any highway, freeway,
or roadway in the state. Electronic and nonelectronic signage must
be substantially updated and expanded to ensure that drivers are
fully alerted to the policies required under this section.
For the purposes of this section:
(1) “Carpool lanes” are high-occupancy vehicle lanes, including
express lanes, lanes like those established under RCW 47.56.403,
off-ramp bypass lanes, and on-ramp bypass lanes on any highway,
freeway, or roadway in the state.
(2) “Non-peak hours” mean midday on weekdays, evenings on
weekdays, and all day and all night on weekends.
(a) “Midday on weekdays” is between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday;
(b) “Evenings on weekdays” are between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. on Monday through Thursday;
(c) “All day and all night on weekends” is between the hours of
6:00 p.m. on Friday and 6:00 a.m. on Monday;
(d) “Peak hours” are between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
and 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday.
(3) During hours not specified as non-peak hours under this
section, the use of carpool lanes by a motor vehicle is limited
to those carrying two or more persons, except in the case of a
motorcycle, which may use a carpool lane if carrying one or more
persons.
(4) A governmental entity, authority, or agency shall not avoid
the requirements of this section by redesignating a carpool lane as
another name or designation.
(5) To reduce traffic congestion by encouraging traffic to use
carpool lanes during non-peak hours, a toll may not be charged on
any vehicle in a high-occupancy toll lane under RCW 47.56.403
during non-peak hours, and any tolls or charges imposed and
collected for such lanes during peak hours which exceeds the costs
identified in section 3 of this act must be deposited in the Reduce
Traffic Congestion Account created in section 10 of this act.
This section does not restrict the operation of RCW 46.44.080,
46.61.100, or 46.61.135, thus continuing restricted truck usage of
city streets.
Violation of a restriction of highway usage prescribed by the
appropriate authority under this section is a traffic infraction.
Sec. 3. RCW 47.66.090 and 2005 c 312 s 4 are each amended
to read as follows:
The high-occupancy toll lanes operations account is created in
the state treasury. The department shall deposit ((all)) only those
revenues received by the department as toll charges collected from
high-occupancy toll lane users that are necessary to cover the
costs of construction and operation of the toll lanes. Moneys in
this account may be spent only if appropriated by the legislature.
((Moneys in this account may be used for, but be not limited to,
debt service, planning, administration, construction, maintenance,
operation, repair, rebuilding, enforcement, and expansion of highoccupancy toll lanes and to increase transit, vanpool and carpool,
and trip reduction services in the corridor. A reasonable proportion
of the moneys in this account must be dedicated to increase transit,
vanpool, carpool, and trip reduction services in the corridor. A
reasonable proportion of the moneys in this account must be
dedicated to increase transit, vanpool, carpool, and trip reduction
services in the corridor.)) All toll charge revenues exceeding these
costs shall be dedicated to reducing traffic congestion and be
deposited in the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account created in
section 10 of this act.
Sec. 4. RCW 47.56.403 and 2005 c 312 s 3 are each amended
to read as follows:
(1) The department may provide, subject to the requirements
of RCW 46.61.165, 47.66.090, and any other applicable law, for
the establishment, construction, and operation of a pilot project
of high-occupancy toll lanes on state route 167 high-occupancy
vehicle lanes within King county. The department may issue, buy,
and redeem bonds, and deposit and expend them; secure and remit
financial and other assistance in the construction of high-occupancy
toll lanes, carry insurance, and handle any other matters pertaining
to the high-occupancy toll lane pilot project.
(2) Tolls for high-occupancy toll lanes will be established as
follows:
(a) The schedule of toll charges for high-occupancy toll lanes
must be established by the transportation commission and collected
in a manner determined by the commission.
(b) Toll charges shall not be assessed on transit buses and vanpool
vehicles owned or operated by any public agency.
(c) The department shall establish performance standards for
the state route 167 high-occupancy toll lane pilot project. The
department must automatically adjust the toll charge, using dynamic
tolling, to ensure that toll-paying single-occupant vehicle users are
only permitted to enter the lane to the extent that average vehicle
speeds in the lane remain above forty-five miles per hour at least
ninety percent of the time during peak hours as defined in RCW
46.61.165. The toll charge may vary in amount by time of day, level
of traffic congestion within the highway facility, vehicle occupancy,
or other criteria, as the commission may deem appropriate. The
commission may also vary toll charges for single-occupant
inherently low-emission vehicles such as those powered by electric
batteries, natural gas, propane, or other clean burning fuels.
(d) The commission shall periodically review the toll charges
to determine if the toll charges are effectively maintaining travel
(continued)
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 28
Complete Text of
(continued)
time, speed, and reliability on the highway facilities.
(3) The department shall monitor the state route 167 highoccupancy toll lane pilot project and shall annually report to the
transportation commission and the legislature on operations and
findings. At a minimum, the department shall provide facility use
data and review the impacts on:
(a) Freeway efficiency and safety;
(b) Effectiveness for transit;
(c) Person and vehicle movements by mode;
(d) Ability to finance improvements and transportation services
through tolls; and
(e) The impacts on all highway users. The department shall
analyze aggregate use data and conduct, as needed, separate
surveys to assess usage of the facility in relation to geographic,
socioeconomic, and demographic information within the corridor
in order to ascertain actual and perceived questions of equitable
use of the facility.
(4) The department shall modify the pilot project to address
identified safety issues and mitigate negative impacts to highoccupancy vehicle lane users.
(5) Authorization to impose high-occupancy vehicle tolls for the
state route 167 high-occupancy toll pilot project expires if either
of the following two conditions apply:
(a) If no contracts have been let by the department to begin
construction of the toll facilities associated with this pilot project
within four years of July 24, 2005; or
(b) Four years after toll collection begins under this section.
(6) The department of transportation shall adopt rules that allow
automatic vehicle identification transponders used for electronic
toll collection to be compatible with other electronic payment
devices or transponders from the Washington state ferry system,
other public transportation systems, or other toll collection systems
to the extent that technology permits.
(7) The conversion of a single existing high-occupancy vehicle
lane to a high-occupancy toll lane as proposed for SR-167 must
be taken as the exception for this pilot project.
(8) A violation of the lane restrictions applicable to the highoccupancy toll lanes established under this section is a traffic
infraction.
(9) Procurement activity associated with this pilot project shall
be open and competitive in accordance with chapter 39.29 RCW.
REQUIRES SYNCHRONIZATION OF TRAFFIC LIGHTS
ON HEAVILY-TRAVELED ARTERIALS AND STREETS
NEW SECTION. Sec. 5. A new section is added to chapter 35.21
RCW to read as follows:
(1) To reduce traffic congestion and increase traffic flow, each
city must synchronize the traffic lights on heavily-traveled arterials
and streets within its jurisdiction to optimize traffic flow. Heavilytraveled arterials and streets include routes of regional and local
significance and include major and secondary arterials as defined
in RCW 35.78.010. For heavily-traveled arterials and streets
outside of a city, the county must synchronize the traffic lights to
optimize traffic flow. For heavily-traveled arterials and streets that
are the responsibility of the state or other local government, the
state or other local government must synchronize the arterials’ and
streets’ traffic lights to optimize traffic flow. Cities, counties, and
other governments must cooperate and coordinate their efforts in
implementing this traffic light synchronization mandate. Funding
shall be allocated from the dedicated revenue in the Reduce Traffic
Congestion Account created in section 10 of this act to assist efforts
after January 1, 2008 by cities, counties, and other governments
to synchronize traffic lights to optimize traffic flow and reduce
traffic congestion.
(2) The state auditor shall identify and establish performance
benchmarks using best practices for traffic light synchronization
to optimize traffic flow under this section. The state auditor
shall investigate and track local governments’ progress on these
benchmarks and shall provide information on such progress and
other relevant information to the public on a regular basis.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 6. A new section is added to chapter 36.01
RCW to read as follows:
(1) To reduce traffic congestion and increase traffic flow, each
county must synchronize the traffic lights on heavily-traveled
arterials and streets within its jurisdiction to optimize traffic flow.
Heavily-traveled arterials and streets include routes of regional
and local significance and include major and secondary arterials
as defined in RCW 35.78.010. For heavily-traveled arterials and
streets in an incorporated city or town, the city or town must
synchronize the traffic lights to optimize traffic flow. For heavilytraveled arterials and streets that are the responsibility of the state
or other government entity, the state or other government entity
must synchronize the traffic lights to optimize traffic flow. Cities,
counties, and other governments must cooperate and coordinate
their efforts in implementing this traffic light synchronization
mandate. Funding shall be allocated from the dedicated revenue
in the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account created in section 10 of
this act to assist efforts after January 1, 2008 by cities, counties, and
other local governments to synchronize traffic lights to optimize
traffic flow and reduce traffic congestion.
 (2) The state auditor shall identify and establish performance
benchmarks using best practices for traffic light synchronization
to optimize traffic flow under this section. The state auditor
shall investigate and track local governments’ progress on these
benchmarks and shall provide information on such progress and
other relevant information to the public on a regular basis.
INCREASES FUNDING FOR EMERGENCY
ROADSIDE ASSISTANCE
NEW SECTION. Sec. 7. A new section is added to chapter 47.01
RCW to read as follows:
(1) To reduce traffic congestion and increase traffic flow, the
department of transportation and other governmental entities
must rapidly respond to traffic accidents and other obstructions on
highways, freeways, roads, and streets, and clear these accidents
and obstructions as expeditiously as possible. The department and
other governmental entities must receive increased funding for
emergency roadside assistance from the dedicated revenue in the
Reduce Traffic Congestion Relief Account created in section 10
of this act. To maximize flexibility and response times, the state,
the department, and other governmental entities may and are
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 29
Complete Text of
encouraged to contract out emergency roadside assistance services
to private companies, including tow truck operators.
(2) The state auditor shall identify and establish performance
benchmarks using best practices for emergency roadside assistance
under this section and shall investigate and track progress fulfilling
this requirement, providing this and other relevant information to
the public on a regular basis.
DEDICATES A PORTION OF EXISTING VEHICLERELATED REVENUE TO HELP FUND THE OPENING
OF CARPOOL LANES TO EVERYONE DURING NONPEAK HOURS, HELP FUND THE SYNCHRONIZATION
OF TRAFFIC LIGHTS ON HEAVILY-TRAVELED
ARTERIALS AND STREETS, AND INCREASE FUNDING
FOR EMERGENCY ROADSIDE ASSISTANCE
Sec. 8. RCW 82.08.020 and 2006 c 1 s 3 are each amended to
read as follows:
(1) There is levied and there shall be collected a tax on each
retail sale in this state equal to six and five-tenths percent of the
selling price.
(2) There is levied and there shall be collected an additional
tax on each retail car rental, regardless of whether the vehicle is
licensed in this state, equal to five and nine-tenths percent of the
selling price. The revenue collected under this subsection shall
be deposited in the multimodal transportation account created in
RCW 47.66.070.
(3) Beginning July 1, 2003, there is levied and collected an
additional tax of three-tenths of one percent of the selling price
on each retail sale of a motor vehicle in this state, other than retail
car rentals taxed under subsection (2) of this section. The revenue
collected under this subsection shall be deposited in the multimodal
transportation account created in RCW 47.66.070.
(4) For purposes of subsections (3) and (8) of this section, “motor
vehicle” has the meaning provided in RCW 46.04.320, but does
not include farm tractors or farm vehicles as defined in RCW
46.04.180 and 46.04.181, off-road and nonhighway vehicles as
defined in RCW 46.09.020, and snowmobiles as defined in RCW
46.10.010.
(5) Beginning on December 8, 2005, 0.16 percent of the taxes
collected under subsection (1) of this section shall be dedicated
to funding comprehensive performance audits required under
RCW 43.09.470. The revenue identified in this subsection shall be
deposited in the performance audits of government account created
in RCW 43.09.475.
(6) The taxes imposed under this chapter shall apply to successive
retail sales of the same property.
(7) The rates provided in this section apply to taxes imposed under
chapter 82.12 RCW as provided in RCW 82.12.020.
(8) To effectively utilize existing resources to reduce traffic
congestion, beginning on December 4, 2008, fifteen percent of the
taxes collected under subsection (1) of this section on the retail sale
of those vehicles taxed under subsection (3) of this section shall be
dedicated to reducing traffic congestion and deposited in the Reduce
Traffic Congestion Account created in section 10 of this act. This
subsection (8) of this section dedicates a portion of existing vehicle
sales tax revenue and does not raise taxes.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 9. A new section is added to chapter 82.12
RCW to read as follows:
Beginning on December 4, 2008, fifteen percent of the taxes
collected under RCW 82.12.020 on vehicles taxed under RCW
82.08.020(3) based on the rate in RCW 82.08.020(1) shall be
dedicated to reducing traffic congestion and deposited in the Reduce
Traffic Congestion Account created in section 10 of this act.
CREATES “REDUCE TRAFFIC
CONGESTION ACCOUNT”
NEW SECTION. Sec. 10. A new section is added to chapter
46.68 RCW to read as follows:
(1) The Reduce Traffic Congestion Account is hereby created in
the state treasury as a subaccount of the motor vehicle fund. All
receipts from: The fifteen percent of sales and use taxes dedicated
in RCW 82.08.020(8) and section 9 of this act; any tolls or charges
collected under RCW 46.61.165(5) and 47.66.090; revenue from
infractions dedicated to reducing traffic congestion under RCW
43.63.110; appropriate allocated funds under section 13 of this
act; and any tolls or charges collected under RCW 47.56.030 and
47.56.170 must be deposited in the subaccount. Moneys in the
subaccount may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures
from the subaccount may be used only:
(a) To pay for costs associated with the opening of carpool lanes to
everyone during non-peak hours as required under RCW 46.61.165,
including new and modified electronic and nonelectronic signage;
lane striping, improvements, and maintenance; and shoulder
maintenance and improvements, including bumpers;
(b) To pay for costs associated with synchronizing traffic lights
on heavily-traveled arterials and streets as required under sections
5 and 6 of this act;
(c) To provide increased funding for emergency roadside
assistance as required under section 7 of this act; and
(d) To provide funding for the activities of the state auditor
required under this section and sections 5, 6, and 7 of this act.
(2) After payment of costs identified in subsections (1)(a)
through (d) of this section, any other purpose which reduces traffic
congestion by reducing vehicle delay times by expanding road
capacity and general purpose use to improve traffic flow for all
vehicles may be provided funding from the subaccount. Purposes
to improve traffic flow for all vehicles do not include creating,
maintaining, or operating bike paths or lanes, wildlife crossings,
landscaping, park and ride lots, ferries, trolleys, buses, monorail,
light rail, or heavy rail.
(3) Revenue deposited in the subaccount and not appropriated
shall be retained by this subaccount.
(4) To measure the level of compliance with the policies,
purposes, and intent of this act, the state auditor shall investigate
and track the revenues and expenditures required under this act
and shall report this and other relevant information to the public
on a regular basis.
DEDICATES REVENUE FROM RED LIGHT TRAFFIC
CAMERAS TO THE
“REDUCE TRAFFIC CONGESTION ACCOUNT”
Sec. 11. RCW 46.63.110 and 2007 c 356 s 8 and 2007 c 199 s 28
(continued)
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 30
Complete Text of
are each reenacted and amended to read as follows:
(1) A person found to have committed a traffic infraction shall be
assessed a monetary penalty. No penalty may exceed two hundred
and fifty dollars for each offense unless authorized by this chapter
or title.
(2) The monetary penalty for a violation of (a) RCW 46.55.105(2)
is two hundred fifty dollars for each offense; (b) RCW 46.61.210(1)
is five hundred dollars for each offense. No penalty assessed under
this subsection (2) may be reduced.
(3) The supreme court shall prescribe by rule a schedule of
monetary penalties for designated traffic infractions. This rule shall
also specify the conditions under which local courts may exercise
discretion in assessing fines and penalties for traffic infractions.
The legislature respectfully requests the supreme court to adjust
this schedule every two years for inflation.
(4) There shall be a penalty of twenty-five dollars for failure to
respond to a notice of traffic infraction except where the infraction
relates to parking as defined by local law, ordinance, regulation, or
resolution or failure to pay a monetary penalty imposed pursuant
to this chapter. A local legislative body may set a monetary penalty
not to exceed twenty-five dollars for failure to respond to a notice
of traffic infraction relating to parking as defined by local law,
ordinance, regulation, or resolution. The local court, whether a
municipal, police, or district court, shall impose the monetary
penalty set by the local legislative body.
(5) Monetary penalties provided for in chapter 46.70 RCW
which are civil in nature and penalties which may be assessed for
violations of chapter 46.44 RCW relating to size, weight, and load
of motor vehicles are not subject to the limitation on the amount
of monetary penalties which may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter.
(6) Whenever a monetary penalty, fee, cost, assessment, or other
monetary obligation is imposed by a court under this chapter it is
immediately payable. If the court determines, in its discretion, that a
person is not able to pay a monetary obligation in full, and not more
than one year has passed since the later of July 1, 2005, or the date
the monetary obligation initially became due and payable, the court
shall enter into a payment plan with the person, unless the person
has previously been granted a payment plan with respect to the same
monetary obligation, or unless the person is in noncompliance of
any existing or prior payment plan, in which case the court may, at
its discretion, implement a payment plan. If the court has notified
the department that the person has failed to pay or comply and the
person has subsequently entered into a payment plan and made
an initial payment, the court shall notify the department that the
infraction has been adjudicated, and the department shall rescind
any suspension of the person’s driver’s license or driver’s privilege
based on failure to respond to that infraction. “Payment plan,” as
used in this section, means a plan that requires reasonable payments
based on the financial ability of the person to pay. The person may
voluntarily pay an amount at any time in addition to the payments
required under the payment plan.
(a) If a payment required to be made under the payment plan is
delinquent or the person fails to complete a community restitution
program on or before the time established under the payment plan,
unless the court determines good cause therefor and adjusts the
payment plan or the community restitution plan accordingly, the
court shall notify the department of the person’s failure to meet
the conditions of the plan, and the department shall suspend the
person’s driver’s license or driving privilege until all monetary
obligations, including those imposed under subsections (3) and (4)
of this section, have been paid, and court authorized community
restitution has been completed, or until the department has been
notified that the court has entered into a new time payment or
community restitution agreement with the person.
(b) If a person has not entered into a payment plan with the court
and has not paid the monetary obligation in full on or before the
time established for payment, the court shall notify the department
of the delinquency. The department shall suspend the person’s
driver’s license or driving privilege until all monetary obligations
have been paid, including those imposed under subsections (3) and
(4) of this section, or until the person has entered into a payment
plan under this section.
(c) If the payment plan is to be administered by the court, the court
may assess the person a reasonable administrative fee to be wholly
retained by the city or county with jurisdiction. The administrative
fee shall not exceed ten dollars per infraction or twenty-five dollars
per payment plan, whichever is less.
(d) Nothing in this section precludes a court from contracting
with outside entities to administer its payment plan system. When
outside entities are used for the administration of a payment
plan, the court may assess the person a reasonable fee for such
administrative services, which fee may be calculated on a periodic,
percentage, or other basis.
(e) If a court authorized community restitution program for
offenders is available in the jurisdiction, the court may allow
conversion of all or part of the monetary obligations due under
this section to court authorized community restitution in lieu of
time payments if the person is unable to make reasonable time
payments.
(7) In addition to any other penalties imposed under this section
and not subject to the limitation of subsection (1) of this section,
a person found to have committed a traffic infraction shall be
assessed:
(a) A fee of five dollars per infraction. Under no circumstances
shall this fee be reduced or waived. Revenue from this fee shall
be forwarded to the state treasurer for deposit in the emergency
medical services and trauma care system trust account under RCW
70.168.040;
(b) A fee of ten dollars per infraction. Under no circumstances
shall this fee be reduced or waived. Revenue from this fee shall
be forwarded to the state treasurer for deposit in the Washington
auto theft prevention authority account; and
(c) A fee of two dollars per infraction. Revenue from this fee
shall be forwarded to the state treasurer for deposit in the traumatic
brain injury account established in RCW 74.31.060.
(8)(a) In addition to any other penalties imposed under this section
and not subject to the limitation of subsection (1) of this section,
a person found to have committed a traffic infraction other than of
(continued)
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 31
Complete Text of
RCW 46.61.527 shall be assessed an additional penalty of twenty
dollars. The court may not reduce, waive, or suspend the additional
penalty unless the court finds the offender to be indigent. If a court
authorized community restitution program for offenders is available
in the jurisdiction, the court shall allow offenders to offset all or a
part of the penalty due under this subsection (8) by participation in
the court authorized community restitution program.
(b) Eight dollars and fifty cents of the additional penalty under
(a) of this subsection shall be remitted to the state treasurer. The
remaining revenue from the additional penalty must be remitted
under chapters 2.08, 3.46, 3.50, 3.62, 10.82, and 35.20 RCW.
Money remitted under this subsection to the state treasurer must
be deposited as provided in RCW 43.08.250. The balance of
the revenue received by the county or city treasurer under this
subsection must be deposited into the county or city current
expense fund. Revenue to be deposited into the county or city
current expense fund from infractions issued under RCW 46.63.170
shall instead be dedicated to reducing traffic congestion and be
deposited in the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account created in
section 10 of this act. Moneys retained by the city or county under
this subsection shall constitute reimbursement for any liabilities
under RCW 43.135.060.
(9) If a legal proceeding, such as garnishment, has commenced
to collect any delinquent amount owed by the person for any
penalty imposed by the court under this section, the court may, at
its discretion, enter into a payment plan.
(10) The monetary penalty for violating RCW 46.37.395 is: (a)
Two hundred fifty dollars for the first violation; (b) five hundred
dollars for the second violation; and (c) seven hundred fifty dollars
for each violation thereafter.
DEDICATES REVENUE PREVIOUSLY
ALLOCATED TO ART TO THE
“REDUCE TRAFFIC CONGESTION ACCOUNT”
NEW SECTION. Sec. 12. RCW 43.17.200 and 2005 c 36 s 4 are
each amended to read as follows:
All state agencies including all state departments, boards, councils,
commissions, and quasi public corporations shall allocate, as a
nondeductible item, out of any moneys appropriated for the original
construction of any public building, except for appropriations
after December 4, 2008 for transportation-related public works
projects, an amount of one-half of one percent of the appropriation
to be expended by the Washington state arts commission for the
acquisition of works of art. The works of art may be placed on
public lands, integral to or attached to a public building or structure,
detached within or outside a public building or structure, part of a
portable exhibition or collection, part of a temporary exhibition, or
loaned or exhibited in other public facilities. In addition to the cost
of the works of art, the one-half of one percent of the appropriation
as provided herein shall be used to provide for the administration
of the visual arts program, including conservation of the state art
collection, by the Washington state arts commission and all costs
for installation of the works of art. For the purpose of this section,
building shall not include highway construction sheds, warehouses
or other buildings of a temporary nature.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 13. To provide additional funds for
reducing traffic congestion, all state agencies, including all state
departments, boards, councils, commissions, and quasi public
corporations shall allocate, as a nondeductible item, out of any
moneys appropriated after December 4, 2008 for any transportationrelated public works project, an amount of one-half of one percent
of the appropriation to be dedicated to reducing traffic congestion
and be deposited in the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account created
in section 10 of this act. The people find that their top priority is
reducing traffic congestion.
Sec. 14. RCW 43.46.090 and 1983 c 204 s 1 are each amended
to read as follows:
The legislature recognizes this state’s responsibility to foster
culture and the arts and its interest in the viable development of
her artists and craftsmen by the establishment of the Washington
state arts commission. The legislature declares it to be a policy of
this state that a portion of appropriations for capital expenditures,
except as provided in RCW 43.17.200 and section 13 of this act, be
set aside for the acquisition of works of art to be placed in public
buildings or lands. There is hereby established a visual arts program
to be administered by the Washington state arts commission.
CRITICAL TAXPAYER PROTECTION:
PREVENTS POLITICIANS FROM DIVERTING TOLL
REVENUE TO THE GENERAL FUND;
TOLLS ON A PROJECT GET SPENT ON THE PROJECT
Sec. 15. RCW 47.56.030 and 2002 c 114 s 19 are each amended
to read as follows:
(1) Except as permitted under chapter 47.46 RCW:
(a) The department of transportation shall have full charge of the
construction of all toll bridges and other toll facilities including
the Washington state ferries, and the operation and maintenance
thereof.
(b) The transportation commission shall determine and establish
the tolls and charges thereon, subject to all applicable laws, and
shall perform all duties and exercise all powers relating to the
financing, refinancing, and fiscal management of all toll bridges
and other toll facilities including the Washington state ferries, and
bonded indebtedness in the manner provided by law. Except for
Washington state ferries toll facilities, revenue from any new tolls
or charges established after December 4, 2008, that exceed the
cost of construction, operation, or maintenance of toll facilities and
new capital improvements to highways, freeways, roads, bridges,
and streets, shall be dedicated to reducing traffic congestion and
deposited in the Reduce Traffic Congestion Account created in
section 10 of this act. Except for Washington state ferries toll
facilities, in the absence of any capital improvements, revenue from
any new tolls or charges established after December 4, 2008, that
exceed the cost of collecting the tolls or charges shall be dedicated
to reducing traffic congestion and deposited in the Reduce Traffic
Congestion Account created in section 10 of this act.
(c) The department shall have full charge of design of all toll
facilities.
(d) Except as provided in this section, the department shall
proceed with the construction of such toll bridges and other
facilities and the approaches thereto by contract in the manner of
(continued)
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 32
Complete Text of
state highway construction immediately upon there being made
available funds for such work and shall prosecute such work to
completion as rapidly as practicable. The department is authorized
to negotiate contracts for any amount without bid under (d)(i) and
(ii) of this subsection:
(i) Emergency contracts, in order to make repairs to ferries or
ferry terminal facilities or removal of such facilities whenever
continued use of ferries or ferry terminal facilities constitutes a real
or immediate danger to the traveling public or precludes prudent
use of such ferries or facilities; and
(ii) Single source contracts for vessel dry dockings, when there
is clearly and legitimately only one available bidder to conduct
dry dock-related work for a specific class or classes of vessels.
The contracts may be entered into for a single vessel dry docking
or for multiple vessel dry dockings for a period not to exceed two
years.
(2) The department shall proceed with the procurement of
materials, supplies, services, and equipment needed for the support,
maintenance, and use of a ferry, ferry terminal, or other facility
operated by Washington state ferries, in accordance with chapter
43.19 RCW except as follows:
(a) Except as provided in (d) of this subsection, when the secretary
of the department of transportation determines in writing that the use
of invitation for bid is either not practicable or not advantageous to
the state and it may be necessary to make competitive evaluations,
including technical or performance evaluations among acceptable
proposals to complete the contract award, a contract may be entered
into by use of a competitive sealed proposals method, and a formal
request for proposals solicitation. Such formal request for proposals
solicitation shall include a functional description of the needs and
requirements of the state and the significant factors.
(b) When purchases are made through a formal request for
proposals solicitation the contract shall be awarded to the
responsible proposer whose competitive sealed proposal is
determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the state
taking into consideration price and other evaluation factors set
forth in the request for proposals. No significant factors may be
used in evaluating a proposal that are not specified in the request for
proposals. Factors that may be considered in evaluating proposals
include but are not limited to: Price; maintainability; reliability;
commonality; performance levels; life cycle cost if applicable under
this section; cost of transportation or delivery; delivery schedule
offered; installation cost; cost of spare parts; availability of parts
and service offered; and the following:
(i) The ability, capacity, and skill of the proposer to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
(ii) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience,
and efficiency of the proposer;
(iii) Whether the proposer can perform the contract within the
time specified;
(iv) The quality of performance of previous contracts or
services;
(v) The previous and existing compliance by the proposer with
laws relating to the contract or services;
(vi) Objective, measurable criteria defined in the request for
proposal. These criteria may include but are not limited to items
such as discounts, delivery costs, maintenance services costs,
installation costs, and transportation costs; and
(vii) Such other information as may be secured having a bearing
on the decision to award the contract.
(c) When purchases are made through a request for proposal
process, proposals received shall be evaluated based on the
evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposal. When
issuing a request for proposal for the procurement of propulsion
equipment or systems that include an engine, the request for
proposal must specify the use of a life cycle cost analysis that
includes an evaluation of fuel efficiency. When a life cycle cost
analysis is used, the life cycle cost of a proposal shall be given
at least the same relative importance as the initial price element
specified in the request of proposal documents. The department
may reject any and all proposals received. If the proposals are not
rejected, the award shall be made to the proposer whose proposal
is most advantageous to the department, considering price and the
other evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposal.
(d) If the department is procuring large equipment or systems
(e.g., electrical, propulsion) needed for the support, maintenance,
and use of a ferry operated by Washington state ferries, the
department shall proceed with a formal request for proposal
solicitation under this subsection (2) without a determination of
necessity by the secretary.
Sec. 16. RCW 47.56.160 and 1984 c 7 s 258 are each amended
to read as follows:
Except for revenues to be deposited in the Reduce Traffic
Congestion Account under RCW 47.56.030(1)(b), ((A))all tolls or
other revenues received from the operation of any toll bridge or
toll bridges constructed with the proceeds of bonds issued and sold
hereunder shall be paid over by the department to the state treasurer.
The treasurer shall deposit them forthwith as demand deposits in
a depository or depositories authorized by law to receive deposits
of state funds. The deposit shall be made to the credit of a special
trust fund designated as the toll revenue fund of the particular toll
bridge or toll bridges producing the tolls or revenue, which fund
shall be a trust fund and shall at all times be kept segregated and
set apart from all other funds.
Sec. 17. RCW 47.56.170 and 1984 c 7. s 259 are each amended
to read as follows:
From the money deposited in each separate construction fund
under RCW 47.56.160, the state treasurer shall transfer to the
place or places of payment named in the bonds such sums as may
be required to pay the interest as it becomes due on all bonds sold
and outstanding for the construction of a particular toll bridge or
toll bridges during the period of actual construction and during the
period of six months immediately thereafter. The state treasurer
shall thereafter transfer from each separate toll revenue fund to
the place or places of payment named in the bonds such sums as
may be required to pay the interest on the bonds and redeem the
principal thereof as the interest payments and bond redemption
become due for all bonds issued and sold for the construction of the
particular toll bridge or toll bridges producing the tolls or revenues
(continued)
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 33
Complete Text of
The Washington Death with Dignity Act
Section Outline
Section 1. Definitions
Adult
Attending physician
Competent
Consulting physician
Counseling
Health care provider
Informed decision
Medically confirmed
Patient
Physician
Qualified patient
Self-administer
Terminal disease
Written Request for Medication to End Life
in a Humane and Dignified Manner
Section 2. Who may initiate a written request for
 medication
Section 3. Form of the written request
Safeguards
Section 4. Attending physician responsibilities
Section 5. Consulting physician confirmation
Section 6. Counseling referral
Section 7. Informed decision
Section 8. Family notification
Section 9. Written and oral requests
Section 10. Right to rescind request
Section 11. Waiting periods
Section 12. Medical record documentation requirements
Section 13. Residency requirement
Section 14. Disposal of unused medications
Section 15. Reporting requirements
Section 16. Effect on construction of wills, contracts, and
 statutes
Section 17. Insurance or annuity policies
Section 18. Construction of Act
Immunities and Liabilities
Section 19. Immunities--basis for prohibiting health care
provider from participation--notification--
permissible sanctions
Section 20. Liabilities
Section 21. Claims by governmental entity for costs incurred
Additional Provisions
Section 22. Form of the request
Section 23. Amendments
Section 24. Amendments
Section 25. Amendments
Section 26. Short title
so deposited in the toll revenue fund. All funds so transferred for the
payment of principal or interest on bonds issued for any particular
toll bridge shall be segregated and applied solely for the payment of
that principal or interest. The proceedings authorizing the issuance
of bonds may provide for setting up a reserve fund or funds out of
the tolls and other revenues not needed for the payment of principal
and interest, as the same currently matures and for the preservation
and continuance of the fund in a manner to be provided therein.
The proceedings may also require the immediate application of
all surplus moneys in the toll revenue fund to the retirement of the
bonds prior to maturity, by call or purchase, in such manner and
upon such terms and the payment of such premiums as may be
deemed advisable in the judgment of the department.
The moneys remaining in each separate toll revenue fund after
providing the amount required for interest and redemption of bonds
as provided in this section shall be held and applied as provided
in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of the bonds. If the
proceedings authorizing the issuance of the bonds do not require
surplus revenues to be held or applied in any particular manner, they
shall be ((allocated and used for such other purposes incidental to
the construction, operation, and maintenance of the toll bridge or
bridges as the department may determine)) dedicated to reducing
traffic congestion and deposited in the Reduce Traffic Congestion
Account created in section 10 of this act.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 18. This act does not inhibit or prohibit the
department of transportation or any other state or local government
agency or body from allocating or expending other revenue from
other sources to fund costs associated with opening carpool lanes
to everyone during non-peak hours, synchronizing traffic lights
on heavily-traveled arterials and streets, or increasing funding for
emergency roadside assistance as required under this act.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 19. The provisions of this act are to be
liberally construed to effectuate the intent, policies, and purposes
of this act.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 20. Subheadings used in this act are not
any part of the law.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 21. If any provision of this act or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
remainder of the act or the application of the provision to other
persons or circumstances is not affected.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 22. This act shall be known and cited as
the Reduce Traffic Congestion Act of 2008.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 23. This act takes effect December 4,
2008.
(continued)
INITIATIVE MEASURE 985
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 34
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
(b) His or her prognosis;
(c) The potential risks associated with taking the medication to be
prescribed;
(d) The probable result of taking the medication to be prescribed;
and
(e) The feasible alternatives including, but not limited to, comfort
care, hospice care, and pain control.
(8) “Medically confirmed” means the medical opinion of the
attending physician has been confirmed by a consulting physician
who has examined the patient and the patient’s relevant medical
records.
(9) “Patient” means a person who is under the care of a
physician.
(10) “Physician” means a doctor of medicine or osteopathy licensed
to practice medicine in the state of Washington.
(11) “Qualified patient” means a competent adult who is a resident
of Washington state and has satisfied the requirements of this chapter
in order to obtain a prescription for medication that the qualified
patient may self-administer to end his or her life in a humane and
dignified manner.
(12) “Self-administer” means a qualified patient’s act of ingesting
medication to end his or her life in a humane and dignified manner.
(13) “Terminal disease” means an incurable and irreversible disease
that has been medically confirmed and will, within reasonable medical
judgment, produce death within six months.
Written Request for Medication to End Life
in a Humane and Dignified Manner
NEW SECTION. Sec. 2. WHO MAY INITIATE A WRITTEN
REQUEST FOR MEDICATION. (1) An adult who is competent,
is a resident of Washington state, and has been determined by the
attending physician and consulting physician to be suffering from a
terminal disease, and who has voluntarily expressed his or her wish
to die, may make a written request for medication that the patient
may self-administer to end his or her life in a humane and dignified
manner in accordance with this chapter.
(2) A person does not qualify under this chapter solely because of
age or disability.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 3. FORM OF THE WRITTEN REQUEST.
(1) A valid request for medication under this chapter shall be in
substantially the form described in section 22 of this act, signed
and dated by the patient and witnessed by at least two individuals
who, in the presence of the patient, attest that to the best of their
knowledge and belief the patient is competent, acting voluntarily,
and is not being coerced to sign the request.
(2) One of the witnesses shall be a person who is not:
(a) A relative of the patient by blood, marriage, or adoption;
(b) A person who at the time the request is signed would be entitled
to any portion of the estate of the qualified patient upon death under
any will or by operation of law; or
(c) An owner, operator, or employee of a health care facility where
the qualified patient is receiving medical treatment or is a resident.
(3) The patient’s attending physician at the time the request is
signed shall not be a witness.
(4) If the patient is a patient in a long-term care facility at the time
Section 27. Severability
Section 28. Effective date
Section 29. New chapter in Title 70
Section 30. Captions, part headings, and subpart headings
not law
Section 31. Expiration date
Initiative Measure No. 1000
AN ACT Relating to death with dignity; amending RCW
70.122.100; reenacting and amending RCW 42.56.360 and 42.56.360;
adding a new chapter to Title 70 RCW; prescribing penalties;
providing an effective date; and providing an expiration date.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF
WASHINGTON:
THE WASHINGTON DEATH WITH DIGNITY ACT
General Provisions
NEW SECTION. Sec. 1. DEFINITIONS. The definitions in
this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
(1) “Adult” means an individual who is eighteen years of age or
older.
(2) “Attending physician” means the physician who has primary
responsibility for the care of the patient and treatment of the patient’s
terminal disease.
(3) “Competent” means that, in the opinion of a court or in the
opinion of the patient’s attending physician or consulting physician,
psychiatrist, or psychologist, a patient has the ability to make and
communicate an informed decision to health care providers, including
communication through persons familiar with the patient’s manner
of communicating if those persons are available.
(4) “Consulting physician” means a physician who is qualified
by specialty or experience to make a professional diagnosis and
prognosis regarding the patient’s disease.
(5) “Counseling” means one or more consultations as necessary
between a state licensed psychiatrist or psychologist and a patient
for the purpose of determining that the patient is competent and not
suffering from a psychiatric or psychological disorder or depression
causing impaired judgment.
(6) “Health care provider” means a person licensed, certified, or
otherwise authorized or permitted by law to administer health care
or dispense medication in the ordinary course of business or practice
of a profession, and includes a health care facility.
(7) “Informed decision” means a decision by a qualified patient,
to request and obtain a prescription for medication that the qualified
patient may self-administer to end his or her life in a humane and
dignified manner, that is based on an appreciation of the relevant
facts and after being fully informed by the attending physician of:
(a) His or her medical diagnosis;
(continued)
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 35
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
(continued)
the written request is made, one of the witnesses shall be an individual
designated by the facility and having the qualifications specified by
the department of health by rule.
Safeguards
NEW SECTION. Sec. 4. ATTENDING PHYSICIAN
RESPONSIBILITIES. (1) The attending physician shall:
(a) Make the initial determination of whether a patient has a terminal
disease, is competent, and has made the request voluntarily;
(b) Request that the patient demonstrate Washington state residency
under section 13 of this act;
(c) To ensure that the patient is making an informed decision,
inform the patient of:
(i) His or her medical diagnosis;
(ii) His or her prognosis;
(iii) The potential risks associated with taking the medication to
be prescribed;
(iv) The probable result of taking the medication to be prescribed;
and
(v) The feasible alternatives including, but not limited to, comfort
care, hospice care, and pain control;
(d) Refer the patient to a consulting physician for medical
confirmation of the diagnosis, and for a determination that the patient
is competent and acting voluntarily;
(e) Refer the patient for counseling if appropriate under section 6
of this act;
(f) Recommend that the patient notify next of kin;
(g) Counsel the patient about the importance of having another
person present when the patient takes the medication prescribed under
this chapter and of not taking the medication in a public place;
(h) Inform the patient that he or she has an opportunity to rescind
the request at any time and in any manner, and offer the patient an
opportunity to rescind at the end of the fifteen-day waiting period
under section 9 of this act;
(i) Verify, immediately before writing the prescription for
medication under this chapter, that the patient is making an informed
decision;
(j) Fulfill the medical record documentation requirements of section
12 of this act;
(k) Ensure that all appropriate steps are carried out in accordance
with this chapter before writing a prescription for medication to enable
a qualified patient to end his or her life in a humane and dignified
manner; and
(l)(i) Dispense medications directly, including ancillary medications
intended to facilitate the desired effect to minimize the patient’s
discomfort, if the attending physician is authorized under statute and
rule to dispense and has a current drug enforcement administration
certificate; or
(ii) With the patient’s written consent:
(A) Contact a pharmacist and inform the pharmacist of the
prescription; and
(B) Deliver the written prescription personally, by mail or facsimile
to the pharmacist, who will dispense the medications directly to either
the patient, the attending physician, or an expressly identified agent
of the patient. Medications dispensed pursuant to this subsection shall
not be dispensed by mail or other form of courier.
(2) The attending physician may sign the patient’s death certificate
which shall list the underlying terminal disease as the cause of
death.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 5. CONSULTING PHYSICIAN
CONFIRMATION. Before a patient is qualified under this chapter, a
consulting physician shall examine the patient and his or her relevant
medical records and confirm, in writing, the attending physician’s
diagnosis that the patient is suffering from a terminal disease, and
verify that the patient is competent, is acting voluntarily, and has
made an informed decision.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 6. COUNSELING REFERRAL. If, in
the opinion of the attending physician or the consulting physician,
a patient may be suffering from a psychiatric or psychological
disorder or depression causing impaired judgment, either physician
shall refer the patient for counseling. Medication to end a patient’s
life in a humane and dignified manner shall not be prescribed until
the person performing the counseling determines that the patient
is not suffering from a psychiatric or psychological disorder or
depression causing impaired judgment.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 7. INFORMED DECISION. A person
shall not receive a prescription for medication to end his or her life
in a humane and dignified manner unless he or she has made an
informed decision. Immediately before writing a prescription for
medication under this chapter, the attending physician shall verify
that the qualified patient is making an informed decision.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 8. FAMILY NOTIFICATION. The
attending physician shall recommend that the patient notify the
next of kin of his or her request for medication under this chapter.
A patient who declines or is unable to notify next of kin shall not
have his or her request denied for that reason.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 9. WRITTEN AND ORAL REQUESTS.
To receive a prescription for medication that the qualified patient
may self-administer to end his or her life in a humane and dignified
manner, a qualified patient shall have made an oral request and a
written request, and reiterate the oral request to his or her attending
physician at least fifteen days after making the initial oral request.
At the time the qualified patient makes his or her second oral
request, the attending physician shall offer the qualified patient an
opportunity to rescind the request.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 10. RIGHT TO RESCIND REQUEST.
A patient may rescind his or her request at any time and in any
manner without regard to his or her mental state. No prescription for
medication under this chapter may be written without the attending
physician offering the qualified patient an opportunity to rescind the
request.
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 36
Complete Text of
NEW SECTION. Sec. 11. WAITING PERIODS. (1) At least
fifteen days shall elapse between the patient’s initial oral request
and the writing of a prescription under this chapter.
(2) At least forty-eight hours shall elapse between the date the
patient signs the written request and the writing of a prescription
under this chapter.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 12. MEDICAL RECORD
DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS. The following shall be
documented or filed in the patient’s medical record:
(1) All oral requests by a patient for medication to end his or her
life in a humane and dignified manner;
(2) All written requests by a patient for medication to end his or
her life in a humane and dignified manner;
(3) The attending physician’s diagnosis and prognosis, and
determination that the patient is competent, is acting voluntarily, and
has made an informed decision;
(4) The consulting physician’s diagnosis and prognosis, and
verification that the patient is competent, is acting voluntarily, and
has made an informed decision;
(5) A report of the outcome and determinations made during
counseling, if performed;
(6) The attending physician’s offer to the patient to rescind his
or her request at the time of the patient’s second oral request under
section 9 of this act; and
(7) A note by the attending physician indicating that all
requirements under this chapter have been met and indicating the steps
taken to carry out the request, including a notation of the medication
prescribed.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 13. RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT. Only
requests made by Washington state residents under this chapter
may be granted. Factors demonstrating Washington state residency
include but are not limited to:
(1) Possession of a Washington state driver’s license;
(2) Registration to vote in Washington state; or
(3) Evidence that the person owns or leases property in
Washington state.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 14. DISPOSAL OF UNUSED
MEDICATIONS. Any medication dispensed under this chapter that
was not self-administered shall be disposed of by lawful means.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 15. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
(1)(a) The department of health shall annually review all records
maintained under this chapter.
(b) The department of health shall require any health care provider
upon writing a prescription or dispensing medication under this
chapter to file a copy of the dispensing record and such other
administratively required documentation with the department. All
administratively required documentation shall be mailed or otherwise
transmitted as allowed by department of health rule to the department
no later than thirty calendar days after the writing of a prescription
and dispensing of medication under this chapter, except that all
documents required to be filed with the department by the prescribing
physician after the death of the patient shall be mailed no later than
thirty calendar days after the date of death of the patient. In the event
that anyone required under this chapter to report information to the
department of health provides an inadequate or incomplete report, the
department shall contact the person to request a complete report.
(2) The department of health shall adopt rules to facilitate the
collection of information regarding compliance with this chapter.
Except as otherwise required by law, the information collected is not
a public record and may not be made available for inspection by the
public.
(3) The department of health shall generate and make available to
the public an annual statistical report of information collected under
subsection (2) of this section.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 16. EFFECT ON CONSTRUCTION OF
WILLS, CONTRACTS, AND STATUTES. (1) Any provision in
a contract, will, or other agreement, whether written or oral, to the
extent the provision would affect whether a person may make or
rescind a request for medication to end his or her life in a humane
and dignified manner, is not valid.
(2) Any obligation owing under any currently existing contract
shall not be conditioned or affected by the making or rescinding of a
request, by a person, for medication to end his or her life in a humane
and dignified manner.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 17. INSURANCE OR ANNUITY
POLICIES. The sale, procurement, or issuance of any life, health,
or accident insurance or annuity policy or the rate charged for any
policy shall not be conditioned upon or affected by the making or
rescinding of a request, by a person, for medication that the patient
may self-administer to end his or her life in a humane and dignified
manner. A qualified patient’s act of ingesting medication to end his
or her life in a humane and dignified manner shall not have an effect
upon a life, health, or accident insurance or annuity policy.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 18. CONSTRUCTION OF ACT. (1)
Nothing in this chapter authorizes a physician or any other person
to end a patient’s life by lethal injection, mercy killing, or active
euthanasia. Actions taken in accordance with this chapter do not,
for any purpose, constitute suicide, assisted suicide, mercy killing,
or homicide, under the law. State reports shall not refer to practice
under this chapter as “suicide” or “assisted suicide.” Consistent
with sections 1 (7), (11), and (12), 2(1), 4(1)(k), 6, 7, 9, 12 (1) and
(2), 16 (1) and (2), 17, 19(1) (a) and (d), and 20(2) of this act, state
reports shall refer to practice under this chapter as obtaining and
self-administering life-ending medication.
(2) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be interpreted to lower
the applicable standard of care for the attending physician, consulting
physician, psychiatrist or psychologist, or other health care provider
participating under this chapter.
Immunities and Liabilities
NEW SECTION. Sec. 19. IMMUNITIES‑-BASIS FOR
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
(continued)
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 37
Complete Text of
PROHIBITING HEALTH CARE PROVIDER FROM
PARTICIPATION‑-NOTIFICATION‑-PERMISSIBLE SANCTIONS.
(1) Except as provided in section 20 of this act and subsection (2)
of this section:
(a) A person shall not be subject to civil or criminal liability
or professional disciplinary action for participating in good faith
compliance with this chapter. This includes being present when a
qualified patient takes the prescribed medication to end his or her
life in a humane and dignified manner;
(b) A professional organization or association, or health care
provider, may not subject a person to censure, discipline, suspension,
loss of license, loss of privileges, loss of membership, or other penalty
for participating or refusing to participate in good faith compliance
with this chapter;
(c) A patient’s request for or provision by an attending physician
of medication in good faith compliance with this chapter does not
constitute neglect for any purpose of law or provide the sole basis
for the appointment of a guardian or conservator; and
(d) Only willing health care providers shall participate in the
provision to a qualified patient of medication to end his or her life in
a humane and dignified manner. If a health care provider is unable
or unwilling to carry out a patient’s request under this chapter, and
the patient transfers his or her care to a new health care provider, the
prior health care provider shall transfer, upon request, a copy of the
patient’s relevant medical records to the new health care provider.
(2)(a) A health care provider may prohibit another health care
provider from participating under this act on the premises of the
prohibiting provider if the prohibiting provider has given notice to all
health care providers with privileges to practice on the premises and
to the general public of the prohibiting provider’s policy regarding
participating under this act. This subsection does not prevent a health
care provider from providing health care services to a patient that do
not constitute participation under this act.
(b) A health care provider may subject another health care provider
to the sanctions stated in this subsection if the sanctioning health care
provider has notified the sanctioned provider before participation in
this act that it prohibits participation in this act:
(i) Loss of privileges, loss of membership, or other sanctions
provided under the medical staff bylaws, policies, and procedures
of the sanctioning health care provider if the sanctioned provider is a
member of the sanctioning provider’s medical staff and participates in
this act while on the health care facility premises of the sanctioning
health care provider, but not including the private medical office of
a physician or other provider;
(ii) Termination of a lease or other property contract or other
nonmonetary remedies provided by a lease contract, not including loss
or restriction of medical staff privileges or exclusion from a provider
panel, if the sanctioned provider participates in this act while on the
premises of the sanctioning health care provider or on property that
is owned by or under the direct control of the sanctioning health care
provider; or
(iii) Termination of a contract or other nonmonetary remedies
provided by contract if the sanctioned provider participates in this
act while acting in the course and scope of the sanctioned provider’s
capacity as an employee or independent contractor of the sanctioning
health care provider. Nothing in this subsection (2)(b)(iii) prevents:
(A) A health care provider from participating in this act while
acting outside the course and scope of the provider’s capacity as an
employee or independent contractor; or
(B) A patient from contracting with his or her attending physician
and consulting physician to act outside the course and scope of the
provider’s capacity as an employee or independent contractor of the
sanctioning health care provider.
(c) A health care provider that imposes sanctions under (b) of this
subsection shall follow all due process and other procedures the
sanctioning health care provider may have that are related to the
imposition of sanctions on another health care provider.
(d) For the purposes of this subsection:
(i) “Notify” means a separate statement in writing to the health
care provider specifically informing the health care provider before
the provider’s participation in this act of the sanctioning health care
provider’s policy about participation in activities covered by this
chapter.
(ii) “Participate in this act” means to perform the duties of an
attending physician under section 4 of this act, the consulting
physician function under section 5 of this act, or the counseling
function under section 6 of this act. “Participate in this act” does not
include:
(A) Making an initial determination that a patient has a terminal
disease and informing the patient of the medical prognosis;
(B) Providing information about the Washington death with dignity
act to a patient upon the request of the patient;
(C) Providing a patient, upon the request of the patient, with a
referral to another physician; or
(D) A patient contracting with his or her attending physician and
consulting physician to act outside of the course and scope of the
provider’s capacity as an employee or independent contractor of the
sanctioning health care provider.
(3) Suspension or termination of staff membership or privileges
under subsection (2) of this section is not reportable under RCW
18.130.070. Action taken under section 3, 4, 5, or 6 of this act may
not be the sole basis for a report of unprofessional conduct under
RCW 18.130.180.
(4) References to “good faith” in subsection (1)(a), (b), and (c)
of this section do not allow a lower standard of care for health care
providers in the state of Washington.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 20. LIABILITIES. (1) A person who without
authorization of the patient willfully alters or forges a request for
medication or conceals or destroys a rescission of that request with
the intent or effect of causing the patient’s death is guilty of a class
A felony.
(2) A person who coerces or exerts undue influence on a patient to
request medication to end the patient’s life, or to destroy a rescission
of a request, is guilty of a class A felony.
(3) This chapter does not limit further liability for civil damages
resulting from other negligent conduct or intentional misconduct by
any person.
(4) The penalties in this chapter do not preclude criminal penalties
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
(continued)
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 38
Complete Text of
applicable under other law for conduct that is inconsistent with this
chapter.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 21. CLAIMS BY GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITY FOR COSTS INCURRED. Any governmental entity
that incurs costs resulting from a person terminating his or her life
under this chapter in a public place has a claim against the estate
of the person to recover such costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
related to enforcing the claim.
Additional Provisions
NEW SECTION. Sec. 22. FORM OF THE REQUEST. A request
for a medication as authorized by this chapter shall be in substantially
the following form:
REQUEST FOR MEDICATION TO END MY LIFE IN A
HUMAN AND DIGNIFIED MANNER
I, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., am an adult of sound mind.
I am suffering from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., which my attending physician
has determined is a terminal disease and which has been medically
confirmed by a consulting physician.
I have been fully informed of my diagnosis, prognosis, the nature
of medication to be prescribed and potential associated risks, the
expected result, and the feasible alternatives, including comfort care,
hospice care, and pain control.
I request that my attending physician prescribe medication that I
may self-administer to end my life in a humane and dignified manner
and to contact any pharmacist to fill the prescription.
INITIAL ONE:
  . . . . . I have informed my family of my decision and taken their
opinions into consideration.
  . . . . . I have decided not to inform my family of my decision.
  . . . . . I have no family to inform of my decision.
I understand that I have the right to rescind this request at any
time.
I understand the full import of this request and I expect to die
when I take the medication to be prescribed. I further understand that
although most deaths occur within three hours, my death may take
longer and my physician has counseled me about this possibility.
I make this request voluntarily and without reservation, and I accept
full moral responsibility for my actions.
Signed: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dated: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
DECLARATION OF WITNESSES
By initialing and signing below on or after the date the person
named above signs, we declare that the person making and signing
the above request:
Witness 1 Witness 2
Initials Initials
. . . . . . . . . . 1. Is personally known to us or has
provided proof of identity;
. . . . . . . . . . 2. Signed this request in our presence
on the date of the person’s signature;
. . . . . . . . . . 3. Appears to be of sound mind and not
under duress, fraud, or undue influence;
. . . . . . . . . 4. Is not a patient for whom either of us
is the attending physician.
Printed Name of Witness 1: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Signature of Witness 1/Date: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Printed Name of Witness 2: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Signature of Witness 2/Date: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
NOTE: One witness shall not be a relative by blood, marriage, or
adoption of the person signing this request, shall not be entitled to any
portion of the person’s estate upon death, and shall not own, operate,
or be employed at a health care facility where the person is a patient
or resident. If the patient is an inpatient at a health care facility, one
of the witnesses shall be an individual designated by the facility.
Sec. 23. RCW 42.56.360 and 2007 c 261 s 4 and 2007 c 259 s 49
are each reenacted and amended to read as follows:
(1) The following health care information is exempt from disclosure
under this chapter:
(a) Information obtained by the board of pharmacy as provided in
RCW 69.45.090;
(b) Information obtained by the board of pharmacy or the
department of health and its representatives as provided in RCW
69.41.044, 69.41.280, and 18.64.420;
(c) Information and documents created specifically for, and
collected and maintained by a quality improvement committee under
RCW 43.70.510 or 70.41.200, or by a peer review committee under
RCW 4.24.250, or by a quality assurance committee pursuant to
RCW 74.42.640 or 18.20.390, or by a hospital, as defined in RCW
43.70.056, for reporting of health care-associated infections under
RCW 43.70.056, and notifications or reports of adverse events or
incidents made under RCW 70.56.020 or 70.56.040, regardless of
which agency is in possession of the information and documents;
(d)(i) Proprietary financial and commercial information that
the submitting entity, with review by the department of health,
specifically identifies at the time it is submitted and that is provided
to or obtained by the department of health in connection with an
application for, or the supervision of, an antitrust exemption sought
by the submitting entity under RCW 43.72.310;
(ii) If a request for such information is received, the submitting
entity must be notified of the request. Within ten business days of
receipt of the notice, the submitting entity shall provide a written
statement of the continuing need for confidentiality, which shall be
provided to the requester. Upon receipt of such notice, the department
of health shall continue to treat information designated under this
subsection (1)(d) as exempt from disclosure;
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
(continued)
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 39
Complete Text of
(iii) If the requester initiates an action to compel disclosure under
this chapter, the submitting entity must be joined as a party to
demonstrate the continuing need for confidentiality;
(e) Records of the entity obtained in an action under RCW
18.71.300 through 18.71.340;
(f) Except for published statistical compilations and reports relating
to the infant mortality review studies that do not identify individual
cases and sources of information, any records or documents obtained,
prepared, or maintained by the local health department for the
purposes of an infant mortality review conducted by the department
of health under RCW 70.05.170;
(g) Complaints filed under chapter 18.130 RCW after July 27,
1997, to the extent provided in RCW 18.130.095(1); ((and))
(h) Information obtained by the department of health under chapter
70.225 RCW; and
(i) Information collected by the department of health under chapter
70.‑- RCW (sections 1 through 22, 26 through 28, and 30 of this act)
except as provided in section 15 of this act.
(2) Chapter 70.02 RCW applies to public inspection and copying
of health care information of patients.
Sec. 24. RCW 42.56.360 and 2007 c 273 s 25, 2007 c 261 s 4,
and 2007 c 259 s 49 are each reenacted and amended to read as
follows:
(1) The following health care information is exempt from disclosure
under this chapter:
(a) Information obtained by the board of pharmacy as provided in
RCW 69.45.090;
(b) Information obtained by the board of pharmacy or the
department of health and its representatives as provided in RCW
69.41.044, 69.41.280, and 18.64.420;
(c) Information and documents created specifically for, and
collected and maintained by a quality improvement committee under
RCW 43.70.510, 70.230.080, or 70.41.200, or by a peer review
committee under RCW 4.24.250, or by a quality assurance committee
pursuant to RCW 74.42.640 or 18.20.390, or by a hospital, as defined
in RCW 43.70.056, for reporting of health care-associated infections
under RCW 43.70.056, and notifications or reports of adverse events
or incidents made under RCW 70.56.020 or 70.56.040, regardless of
which agency is in possession of the information and documents;
(d)(i) Proprietary financial and commercial information that
the submitting entity, with review by the department of health,
specifically identifies at the time it is submitted and that is provided
to or obtained by the department of health in connection with an
application for, or the supervision of, an antitrust exemption sought
by the submitting entity under RCW 43.72.310;
(ii) If a request for such information is received, the submitting
entity must be notified of the request. Within ten business days of
receipt of the notice, the submitting entity shall provide a written
statement of the continuing need for confidentiality, which shall be
provided to the requester. Upon receipt of such notice, the department
of health shall continue to treat information designated under this
subsection (1)(d) as exempt from disclosure;
(iii) If the requester initiates an action to compel disclosure under
this chapter, the submitting entity must be joined as a party to
demonstrate the continuing need for confidentiality;
(e) Records of the entity obtained in an action under RCW
18.71.300 through 18.71.340;
(f) Except for published statistical compilations and reports relating
to the infant mortality review studies that do not identify individual
cases and sources of information, any records or documents obtained,
prepared, or maintained by the local health department for the
purposes of an infant mortality review conducted by the department
of health under RCW 70.05.170;
(g) Complaints filed under chapter 18.130 RCW after July 27,
1997, to the extent provided in RCW 18.130.095(1); ((and))
(h) Information obtained by the department of health under chapter
70.225 RCW; and
(i) Information collected by the department of health under chapter
70.‑- RCW (sections 1 through 22, 26 through 28, and 30 of this act)
except as provided in section 15 of this act.
(2) Chapter 70.02 RCW applies to public inspection and copying
of health care information of patients.
Sec. 25. RCW 70.122.100 and 1992 c 98 s 10 are each amended
to read as follows:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to condone, authorize,
or approve mercy killing ((or physician-assisted suicide, or to permit
any affirmative or deliberate act or omission to end life other than
to permit the natural process of dying)), lethal injection, or active
euthanasia.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 26. SHORT TITLE. This act may be
known and cited as the Washington death with dignity act.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 27. SEVERABILITY. If any provision of
this act or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
the remainder of the act or the application of the provision to other
persons or circumstances is not affected.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 28. EFFECTIVE DATE. This act takes
effect one hundred twenty days after the election at which it is
approved, except for section 24 of this act which takes effect July 1,
2009.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 29. Sections 1 through 22, 26 through 28,
and 30 of this act constitute a new chapter in Title 70 RCW.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 30. CAPTIONS, PART HEADINGS,
AND SUBPART HEADINGS NOT LAW. Captions, part headings,
and subpart headings used in this act are not any part of the law.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 31. Section 23 of this act expires July 1,
2009.
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1000
(continued)
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 40
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
INITIATIVE 1029
FOR QUALITY LONG-TERM CARE
AN ACT Relating to long-term care services for the elderly and
persons with disabilities; amending RCW 74.39A.009, 74.39A.340,
74.39A.350, 74.39A.050, and 18.130.040; reenacting and amending
RCW 18.130.040; adding new sections to chapter 74.39A RCW;
adding a new section to chapter 18.88A RCW; adding a new chapter
to Title 18 RCW; creating new sections; providing an effective date;
and providing a contingent effective date.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF
WASHINGTON:
NEW SECTION. Sec. 1. It is the intent of the people through this
initiative to protect the safety of and improve the quality of care to
the vulnerable elderly and persons with disabilities.
The people find and declare that current procedures to train and
educate long-term care workers and to protect the elderly or persons
with disabilities from caregivers with a criminal background are
insufficient. The people find and declare that long-term care workers
for the elderly or persons with disabilities should have a federal
criminal background check and a formal system of education and
experiential qualifications leading to a certification test.
The people find that the quality of long-term care services
for the elderly and persons with disabilities is dependent upon
the competency of the workers who provide those services. To
assure and enhance the quality of long-term care services for the
elderly and persons with disabilities, the people recognize the need
for federal criminal background checks and increased training
requirements. Their establishment should protect the vulnerable
elderly and persons with disabilities, bring about a more stabilized
workforce, improve the quality of long-term care services, and
provide a valuable resource for recruitment into long-term care
services for the elderly and persons with disabilities.
Sec. 2. RCW 74.39A.009 and 2007 c 361 s 2 are each amended
to read as follows:
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this
section apply throughout this chapter.
(1) “Adult family home” means a home licensed under chapter
70.128 RCW.
(2) “Adult residential care” means services provided by a
boarding home that is licensed under chapter 18.20 RCW and that
has a contract with the department under RCW 74.39A.020 to
provide personal care services.
 (3) “Assisted living services” means services provided by a
boarding home that has a contract with the department under RCW
74.39A.010 to provide personal care services, intermittent nursing
services, and medication administration services, and the resident
is housed in a private apartment-like unit.
(4) “Boarding home” means a facility licensed under chapter
18.20 RCW.
(5) “Core competencies” means basic training topics, including
but not limited to, communication skills, worker self care, problem
solving, maintaining dignity, consumer directed care, cultural
sensitivity, body mechanics, fall prevention, skin and body care,
long-term care worker roles and boundaries, supporting activities
of daily living, and food preparation and handling.
(6) “Cost-effective care” means care provided in a setting of an
individual’s choice that is necessary to promote the most appropriate
level of physical, mental, and psychosocial well-being consistent
with client choice, in an environment that is appropriate to the care
and safety needs of the individual, and such care cannot be provided
at a lower cost in any other setting. But this in no way precludes an
individual from choosing a different residential setting to achieve
his or her desired quality of life.
(((6))) (7) “Department” means the department of social and
health services.
(((7))) (8) “Developmental disability” has the same meaning as
defined in RCW 71A.10.020.
(9) “Direct care worker” means a paid caregiver who provides
direct, hands on personal care services to persons with disabilities
or the elderly requiring long-term care.
(10) “Enhanced adult residential care” means services provided
by a boarding home that is licensed under chapter 18.20 RCW and
that has a contract with the department under RCW 74.39A.010 to
provide personal care services, intermittent nursing services, and
medication administration services.
(((8))) (11) “Functionally disabled person” or “person who is
functionally disabled” is synonymous with chronic functionally
disabled and means a person who because of a recognized chronic
physical or mental condition or disease, or developmental disability,
including chemical dependency, is impaired to the extent of being
dependent upon others for direct care, support, supervision, or
monitoring to perform activities of daily living. “Activities of daily
living”, in this context, means self-care abilities related to personal
care such as bathing, eating, using the toilet, dressing, and transfer.
Instrumental activities of daily living may also be used to assess
a person’s functional abilities as they are related to the mental
capacity to perform activities in the home and the community such
as cooking, shopping, house cleaning, doing laundry, working, and
managing personal finances.
(((9))) (12) “Home and community services” means adult
family homes, in-home services, and other services administered
or provided by contract by the department directly or through
contract with area agencies on aging or similar services provided
by facilities and agencies licensed by the department.
(((10))) (13) “Home care aide” means a long-term care worker
who has obtained certification as a home care aide by the department
of health.
(14) “Individual provider” is defined according to RCW
74.39A.240.
(15) “Long-term care” is synonymous with chronic care and
means care and supports delivered indefinitely, intermittently, or
over a sustained time to persons of any age disabled by chronic
mental or physical illness, disease, chemical dependency, or a
medical condition that is permanent, not reversible or curable, or
is long-lasting and severely limits their mental or physical capacity 
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 41
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
(continued)
for self-care. The use of this definition is not intended to expand the
scope of services, care, or assistance by any individuals, groups,
residential care settings, or professions unless otherwise expressed
by law.
(((11))) (16)(a) “Long-term care workers for the elderly or
persons with disabilities” or “long-term care workers” includes all
persons who are long-term care workers for the elderly or persons
with disabilities, including but not limited to individual providers of
home care services, direct care employees of home care agencies,
providers of home care services to persons with developmental
disabilities under Title 71 RCW, all direct care workers in state
licensed boarding homes, assisted living facilities, and adult family
homes, respite care providers, community residential service
providers, and any other direct care worker providing home or
community-based services to the elderly or persons with functional
disabilities or developmental disabilities.
(b) “Long-term care workers” do not include: (i) Persons
employed in nursing homes subject to chapter 18.51 RCW,
hospitals or other acute care settings, hospice agencies subject to
chapter 70.127 RCW, adult day care centers, and adult day health
care centers; or (ii) persons who are not paid by the state or by a
private agency or facility licensed by the state to provide personal
care services.
(((12))) (17) “Nursing home” means a facility licensed under
chapter 18.51 RCW.
(((13))) (18) “Personal care services” means physical or
verbal assistance with activities of daily living and instrumental
activities of daily living provided because of a person’s functional
disability.
(19) “Population specific competencies” means basic training
topics unique to the care needs of the population the long-term
care worker is serving, including but not limited to, mental health,
dementia, developmental disabilities, young adults with physical
disabilities, and older adults.
(20) “Qualified instructor” means a registered nurse or other
person with specific knowledge, training, and work experience in
the provision of direct, hands on personal care and other assistance
services to the elderly or persons with disabilities requiring longterm care.
(21) “Secretary” means the secretary of social and health
services.
(((14))) (22) “Secretary of health” means the secretary of health
or the secretary’s designee.
(23) “Training partnership” means a joint partnership or trust
((established and maintained jointly by)) that includes the office
of the governor and the exclusive bargaining representative of
individual providers under RCW 74.39A.270 with the capacity to
provide training, peer mentoring, and ((examinations required under
this chapter, and educational, career)) workforce development, or
other services to individual providers.
(((15))) (24) “Tribally licensed boarding home” means a boarding
home licensed by a federally recognized Indian tribe which home
provides services similar to boarding homes licensed under chapter
18.20 RCW.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 3. A new section is added to chapter
74.39A RCW to read as follows:
All long-term care workers for the elderly or persons with
disabilities hired after January l, 2010, shall be screened through
state and federal background checks in a uniform and timely
manner to ensure that they do not have a criminal history that
would disqualify them from working with vulnerable persons.
These background checks shall include checking against the federal
bureau of investigation fingerprint identification records system
and against the national sex offenders registry or their successor
programs. The department shall share this information with the
department of health. The department shall not pass on the cost of
these criminal background checks to the workers or their employers.
The department shall adopt rules to implement the provisions of
this section by August l, 2009.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 4. (1) Effective January l, 2010, except
as provided in section 7 of this act, the department of health shall
require that any person hired as a long-term care worker for the
elderly or persons with disabilities must be certified as a home care
aide within one hundred fifty days from the date of being hired.
(2) Except as provided in section 7 of this act, certification as a
home care aide requires both completion of seventy-five hours of
training and successful completion of a certification examination
pursuant to sections 5 and 6 of this act.
(3) No person may practice or, by use of any title or description,
represent himself or herself as a certified home care aide without
being certified pursuant to this chapter.
(4) The department of health shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009,
to implement this section.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 5. A new section is added to chapter
74.39A RCW to read as follows:
(1) Effective January 1, 2010, except as provided in section 7
of this act, all persons employed as long-term care workers for the
elderly or persons with disabilities must meet the minimum training
requirements in this section within one hundred twenty calendar
days of employment.
(2) All persons employed as long-term care workers must
obtain seventy-five hours of entry level training approved by the
department. A long-term care worker must accomplish five of these
seventy-five hours before becoming eligible to provide care.
(3) Training required by subsection (4)(c) of this section will
be applied towards training required under RCW 18.20.270
or 70.128.230 as well as any statutory or regulatory training
requirements for long-term care workers employed by supportive
living providers.
(4) Only training curriculum approved by the department may
be used to fulfill the training requirements specified in this section.
The seventy-five hours of entry-level training required shall be as
follows:
(a) Before a long-term care worker is eligible to provide care, he
or she must complete two hours of orientation training regarding his
or her role as caregiver and the applicable terms of employment;
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 42
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
(continued)
(b) Before a long-term care worker is eligible to provide care,
he or she must complete three hours of safety training, including
basic safety precautions, emergency procedures, and infection
control; and
(c) All long-term care workers must complete seventy hours of
long-term care basic training, including training related to core
competencies and population specific competencies.
(5) The department shall only approve training curriculum
that:
(a) Has been developed with input from consumer and worker
representatives; and
(b) Requires comprehensive instruction by qualified instructors
on the competencies and training topics in this section.
(6) Individual providers under RCW 74.39A.270 shall be
compensated for training time required by this section.
(7) The department of health shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009,
to implement subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section.
(8) The department shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009, to
implement subsections (4) and (5) of this section.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 6. (1) Effective January 1, 2010, except
as provided in section 7 of this act, the department of health shall
require that all long-term care workers successfully complete a
certification examination. Any long-term care worker failing to
make the required grade for the examination will not be certified
as a home care aide.
(2) The department of health, in consultation with consumer and
worker representatives, shall develop a home care aide certification
examination to evaluate whether an applicant possesses the skills
and knowledge necessary to practice competently. Unless excluded
by section 7 (1) and (2) of this act, only those who have completed
the training requirements in section 5 of this act shall be eligible
to sit for this examination.
(3) The examination shall include both a skills demonstration
and a written or oral knowledge test. The examination papers, all
grading of the papers, and records related to the grading of skills
demonstration shall be preserved for a period of not less than one
year. The department of health shall establish rules governing the
number of times and under what circumstances individuals who
have failed the examination may sit for the examination, including
whether any intermediate remedial steps should be required.
(4) All examinations shall be conducted by fair and wholly
impartial methods. The certification examination shall be
administered and evaluated by the department of health or by a
contractor to the department of health that is neither an employer
of long-term care workers or private contractors providing training
services under this chapter.
(5) The department of health has the authority to:
(a) Establish forms, procedures, and examinations necessary to
certify home care aides pursuant to this chapter;
(b) Hire clerical, administrative, and investigative staff as needed
to implement this section;
(c) Issue certification as a home care aide to any applicant who
has successfully completed the home care aide examination;
(d) Maintain the official record of all applicants and persons
with certificates;
(e) Exercise disciplinary authority as authorized in chapter
18.130 RCW; and
(f) Deny certification to applicants who do not meet training,
competency examination, and conduct requirements for
certification.
(6) The department of health shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009,
that establish the procedures and examinations necessary to carry
this section into effect.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 7. The following long-term care workers
are not required to become a certified home care aide pursuant to
this chapter.
(1) Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, certified
nursing assistants, medicare-certified home health aides, or other
persons who hold a similar health credential, as determined by the
secretary of health, or persons with special education training and
an endorsement granted by the superintendent of public instruction,
as described in RCW 28A.300.010, if the secretary of health
determines that the circumstances do not require certification.
Individuals exempted by this subsection may obtain certification as
a home care aide from the department of health without fulfilling the
training requirements in section 5 of this act but must successfully
complete a certification examination pursuant to section 6 of this
act.
(2) A person already employed as a long-term care worker
prior to January 1, 2010, who completes all of his or her training
requirements in effect as of the date he or she was hired, is not
required to obtain certification. Individuals exempted by this
subsection may obtain certification as a home care aide from the
department of health without fulfilling the training requirements in
section 5 of this act but must successfully complete a certification
examination pursuant to section 6 of this act.
(3) All long-term care workers employed by supported living
providers are not required to obtain certification under this
chapter.
(4) An individual provider caring only for his or her biological,
step, or adoptive child or parent is not required to obtain certification
under this chapter.
(5) Prior to June 30, 2014, a person hired as an individual
provider who provides twenty hours or less of care for one person
in any calendar month is not required to obtain certification under
this chapter.
(6) A long-term care worker exempted by this section from the
training requirements contained in section 5 of this act may not be
prohibited from enrolling in training pursuant to that section.
(7) The department of health shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009,
to implement this section.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 8. A new section is added to chapter
74.39A RCW to read as follows:
(1) Effective January 1, 2010, a biological, step, or adoptive parent
who is the individual provider only for his or her developmentally
disabled son or daughter must receive twelve hours of training 
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 43
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
(continued)
relevant to the needs of adults with developmental disabilities
within the first one hundred twenty days of becoming an individual
provider.
(2) Effective January 1, 2010, individual providers identified in
(a) and (b) of this subsection must complete thirty-five hours of
training within the first one hundred twenty days of becoming an
individual provider. Five of the thirty-five hours must be completed
before becoming eligible to provide care. Two of these five hours
shall be devoted to an orientation training regarding an individual
provider’s role as caregiver and the applicable terms of employment,
and three hours shall be devoted to safety training, including basic
safety precautions, emergency procedures, and infection control.
Individual providers subject to this requirement include:
(a) An individual provider caring only for his or her biological,
step, or adoptive child or parent unless covered by subsection (1)
of this section; and
(b) Before January 1, 2014, a person hired as an individual
provider who provides twenty hours or less of care for one person
in any calendar month.
(3) Only training curriculum approved by the department may
be used to fulfill the training requirements specified in this section.
The department shall only approve training curriculum that:
(a) Has been developed with input from consumer and worker
representatives; and
(b) Requires comprehensive instruction by qualified
instructors.
(4) The department shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009, to
implement this section.
Sec. 9. RCW 74.39A.340 and 2007 c 361 s 4 are each amended
to read as follows:
(1) The department of health shall ensure that all long-term
care workers shall complete twelve hours of continuing education
training in advanced training topics each year. This requirement
applies beginning on January 1, 2010.
(2) Completion of continuing education as required in this section
is a prerequisite to maintaining home care aide certification under
this act.
(3) Unless voluntarily certified as a home care aide under this
act, subsection (1) of this section does not apply to:
(a) An individual provider caring only for his or her biological,
step, or adoptive child; and
(b) Before June 30, 2014, a person hired as an individual provider
who provides twenty hours or less of care for one person in any
calendar month.
(4) Only training curriculum approved by the department may
be used to fulfill the training requirements specified in this section.
The department shall only approve training curriculum that:
(a) Has been developed with input from consumer and worker
representatives; and
(b) Requires comprehensive instruction by qualified
instructors.
(5) Individual providers under RCW 74.39A.270 shall be
compensated for training time required by this section.
(6) The department of health shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009,
to implement subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section.
(7) The department shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009, to
implement subsection (4) of this section.
Sec. 10. RCW 74.39A.350 and 2007 c 361 s 5 are each amended
to read as follows:
The department shall offer, directly or through contract, training
opportunities sufficient for a long-term care worker to accumulate
((sixty-five)) seventy hours of training within a reasonable time
period. For individual providers represented by an exclusive
bargaining representative under RCW 74.39A.270, the training
opportunities shall be offered through ((a contract with)) the training
partnership established under RCW 74.39A.360. Training topics
shall include, but are not limited to: Client rights; personal care;
mental illness; dementia; developmental disabilities; depression;
medication assistance; advanced communication skills; positive
client behavior support; developing or improving client-centered
activities; dealing with wandering or aggressive client behaviors;
medical conditions; nurse delegation core training; peer mentor
training; and advocacy for quality care training. The department
may not require long-term care workers to obtain the training
described in this section. This requirement to offer advanced
training applies beginning January 1, ((2010)) 2011.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 11. A new section is added to chapter
l8.88A RCW to read as follows:
By August 1, 2009, the department of health shall develop, in
consultation with the nursing care quality assurance commission and
consumer and worker representatives, rules permitting reciprocity
to the maximum extent possible under federal law between home
care aide certification and nursing assistant certification.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 12. A new section is added to chapter
74.39A RCW to read as follows:
(1) The department shall deny payment to any individual
provider of home care services who has not been certified by the
department of health as a home care aide as required under this act
or, if exempted from certification by section 7 of this act, has not
completed his or her required training pursuant to this act.
(2) The department may terminate the contract of any individual
provider of home care services, or take any other enforcement
measure deemed appropriate by the department if the individual
provider’s certification is revoked under this act or, if exempted
from certification by section 7 of this act, has not completed his or
her required training pursuant to this act.
(3) The department shall take appropriate enforcement action
related to the contract of a private agency or facility licensed by
the state, to provide personal care services, other than an individual
provider, who knowingly employs a long-term care worker who
is not a certified home care aide as required under this act or,
if exempted from certification by section 7 of this act, has not
completed his or her required training pursuant to this act.
(4) Chapter 34.05 RCW shall govern actions by the department
under this section.
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 44
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
(continued)
(5) The department shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009, to
implement this section.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 13. (1) The uniform disciplinary act,
chapter 18.130 RCW, governs uncertified practice, issuance of
certificates, and the discipline of persons with certificates under this
chapter. The secretary of health shall be the disciplinary authority
under this chapter.
(2) The secretary of health may take action to immediately
suspend the certification of a long-term care worker upon finding
that conduct of the long-term care worker has caused or presents
an imminent threat of harm to a functionally disabled person in
his or her care.
(3) If the secretary of health imposes suspension or conditions
for continuation of certification, the suspension or conditions
for continuation are effective immediately upon notice and shall
continue in effect pending the outcome of any hearing.
(4) The department of health shall take appropriate enforcement
action related to the licensure of a private agency or facility
licensed by the state, to provide personal care services, other than
an individual provider, who knowingly employs a long-term care
worker who is not a certified home care aide as required under
this chapter or, if exempted from certification by section 7 of this
act, has not completed his or her required training pursuant to this
chapter.
(5) Chapter 34.05 RCW shall govern actions by the department
of health under this section.
(6) The department of health shall adopt rules by August 1, 2009,
to implement this section.
Sec. 14. RCW 74.39A.050 and 2004 c 140 s 6 are each amended
to read as follows:
The department’s system of quality improvement for long-term
care services shall use the following principles, consistent with
applicable federal laws and regulations:
(1) The system shall be client-centered and promote privacy,
independence, dignity, choice, and a home or home-like environment
for consumers consistent with chapter 392, Laws of 1997.
(2) The goal of the system is continuous quality improvement
with the focus on consumer satisfaction and outcomes for
consumers. This includes that when conducting licensing or
contract inspections, the department shall interview an appropriate
percentage of residents, family members, resident case managers,
and advocates in addition to interviewing providers and staff.
(3) Providers should be supported in their efforts to improve
quality and address identified problems initially through training,
consultation, technical assistance, and case management.
(4) The emphasis should be on problem prevention both in
monitoring and in screening potential providers of service.
(5) Monitoring should be outcome based and responsive to
consumer complaints and based on a clear set of health, quality of
care, and safety standards that are easily understandable and have
been made available to providers, residents, and other interested
parties.
(6) Prompt and specific enforcement remedies shall also be
implemented without delay, pursuant to RCW 74.39A.080, RCW
70.128.160, chapter 18.51 RCW, or chapter 74.42 RCW, for
providers found to have delivered care or failed to deliver care
resulting in problems that are serious, recurring, or uncorrected,
or that create a hazard that is causing or likely to cause death or
serious harm to one or more residents. These enforcement remedies
may also include, when appropriate, reasonable conditions on a
contract or license. In the selection of remedies, the safety, health,
and well-being of residents shall be of paramount importance.
(7) ((To the extent funding is available, all long-term care staff
directly responsible for the care, supervision, or treatment of
vulnerable persons should be screened through background checks
in a uniform and timely manner to ensure that they do not have
a criminal history that would disqualify them from working with
vulnerable persons. Whenever a state conviction record check
is required by state law, persons may be employed or engaged
as volunteers or independent contractors on a conditional basis
according to law and rules adopted by the department.)) All longterm care workers shall be screened through background checks
in a uniform and timely manner to ensure that they do not have
a criminal history that would disqualify them from working with
vulnerable persons. This information will be shared with the
department of health to advance the purposes of this act.
(8) No provider or ((staff)) long-term care worker, or prospective
provider or ((staff)) long-term care worker, with a stipulated
finding of fact, conclusion of law, an agreed order, or finding of
fact, conclusion of law, or final order issued by a disciplining
authority, a court of law, or entered into a state registry finding
him or her guilty of abuse, neglect, exploitation, or abandonment
of a minor or a vulnerable adult as defined in chapter 74.34 RCW
shall be employed in the care of and have unsupervised access to
vulnerable adults.
(9) The department shall establish, by rule, a state registry
which contains identifying information about ((personal care
aides)) long-term care workers identified under this chapter
who have substantiated findings of abuse, neglect, financial
exploitation, or abandonment of a vulnerable adult as defined in
RCW 74.34.020. The rule must include disclosure, disposition
of findings, notification, findings of fact, appeal rights, and fair
hearing requirements. The department shall disclose, upon request,
substantiated findings of abuse, neglect, financial exploitation, or
abandonment to any person so requesting this information. This
information will also be shared with the department of health to
advance the purposes of this act.
(10) ((The department shall by rule develop training requirements
for individual providers and home care agency providers. Effective
March 1, 2002,)) Until December 31, 2009, individual providers
and home care agency providers must satisfactorily complete
department-approved orientation, basic training, and continuing
education within the time period specified by the department in
rule. The department shall adopt rules by March 1, 2002, for the
implementation of this section ((based on the recommendations
of the community long-term care training and education steering
committee established in RCW 74.39A.190)). The department shall 
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 45
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
(continued)
deny payment to an individual provider or a home care provider
who does not complete the training requirements within the time
limit specified by the department by rule.
(11) Until December 31, 2009, in an effort to improve access
to training and education and reduce costs, especially for rural
communities, the coordinated system of long-term care training
and education must include the use of innovative types of learning
strategies such as internet resources, videotapes, and distance
learning using satellite technology coordinated through community
colleges or other entities, as defined by the department.
(12) The department shall create an approval system by March 1,
2002, for those seeking to conduct department-approved training.
((In the rule-making process, the department shall adopt rules
based on the recommendations of the community long-term care
training and education steering committee established in RCW
74.39A.190.))
(13) The department shall establish, by rule, ((training,))
background checks((,)) and other quality assurance requirements
for ((personal aides)) long-term care workers who provide inhome services funded by medicaid personal care as described in
RCW 74.09.520, community options program entry system waiver
services as described in RCW 74.39A.030, or chore services as
described in RCW 74.39A.110 that are equivalent to requirements
for individual providers.
(14) Under existing funds the department shall establish
internally a quality improvement standards committee to monitor
the development of standards and to suggest modifications.
(15) Within existing funds, the department shall design, develop,
and implement a long-term care training program that is flexible,
relevant, and qualifies towards the requirements for a nursing
assistant certificate as established under chapter 18.88A RCW. This
subsection does not require completion of the nursing assistant
certificate training program by providers or their staff. The longterm care teaching curriculum must consist of a fundamental
module, or modules, and a range of other available relevant training
modules that provide the caregiver with appropriate options that
assist in meeting the resident’s care needs. Some of the training
modules may include, but are not limited to, specific training on
the special care needs of persons with developmental disabilities,
dementia, mental illness, and the care needs of the elderly. No less
than one training module must be dedicated to workplace violence
prevention. The nursing care quality assurance commission shall
work together with the department to develop the curriculum
modules. The nursing care quality assurance commission shall
direct the nursing assistant training programs to accept some or
all of the skills and competencies from the curriculum modules
towards meeting the requirements for a nursing assistant certificate
as defined in chapter 18.88A RCW. A process may be developed to
test persons completing modules from a caregiver’s class to verify
that they have the transferable skills and competencies for entry into
a nursing assistant training program. The department may review
whether facilities can develop their own related long-term care
training programs. The department may develop a review process
for determining what previous experience and training may be used
to waive some or all of the mandatory training. The department of
social and health services and the nursing care quality assurance
commission shall work together to develop an implementation plan
by December 12, 1998.
Sec. 15. RCW 18.130.040 and 2007 c 269 s 17, 2007 c 253 s
13, and 2007 c 70 s 11 are each reenacted and amended to read
as follows:
(1) This chapter applies only to the secretary and the boards
and commissions having jurisdiction in relation to the professions
licensed under the chapters specified in this section. This chapter
does not apply to any business or profession not licensed under the
chapters specified in this section.
(2)(a) The secretary has authority under this chapter in relation
to the following professions:
(i) Dispensing opticians licensed and designated apprentices
under chapter 18.34 RCW;
(ii) Naturopaths licensed under chapter 18.36A RCW;
(iii) Midwives licensed under chapter 18.50 RCW;
(iv) Ocularists licensed under chapter 18.55 RCW;
(v) Massage operators and businesses licensed under chapter
18.108 RCW;
(vi) Dental hygienists licensed under chapter 18.29 RCW;
(vii) Acupuncturists licensed under chapter 18.06 RCW;
(viii) Radiologic technologists certified and X-ray technicians
registered under chapter 18.84 RCW;
(ix) Respiratory care practitioners licensed under chapter 18.89
RCW;
(x) Persons registered under chapter 18.19 RCW;
(xi) Persons licensed as mental health counselors, marriage
and family therapists, and social workers under chapter 18.225
RCW;
(xii) Persons registered as nursing pool operators under chapter
18.52C RCW;
(xiii) Nursing assistants registered or certified under chapter
18.88A RCW;
(xiv) Health care assistants certified under chapter 18.135
RCW;
(xv) Dietitians and nutritionists certified under chapter 18.138
RCW;
(xvi) Chemical dependency professionals certified under chapter
18.205 RCW;
(xvii) Sex offender treatment providers and certified affiliate
sex offender treatment providers certified under chapter 18.155
RCW;
(xviii) Persons licensed and certified under chapter 18.73 RCW
or RCW 18.71.205;
(xix) Denturists licensed under chapter 18.30 RCW;
(xx) Orthotists and prosthetists licensed under chapter 18.200
RCW;
(xxi) Surgical technologists registered under chapter 18.215
RCW;
(xxii) Recreational therapists;
(xxiii) Animal massage practitioners certified under chapter
18.240 RCW; ((and))
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 46
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
(continued)
(xxiv) Athletic trainers licensed under chapter 18.250 RCW;
and
(xxv) Home care aides certified under chapter 18. -- RCW (the
new chapter created in section 18 of this act).
(b) The boards and commissions having authority under this
chapter are as follows:
(i) The podiatric medical board as established in chapter 18.22
RCW;
(ii) The chiropractic quality assurance commission as established
in chapter 18.25 RCW;
(iii) The dental quality assurance commission as established
in chapter 18.32 RCW governing licenses issued under chapter
18.32 RCW and licenses and registrations issued under chapter
18.260 RCW;
(iv) The board of hearing and speech as established in chapter
18.35 RCW;
(v) The board of examiners for nursing home administrators as
established in chapter 18.52 RCW;
(vi) The optometry board as established in chapter 18.54 RCW
governing licenses issued under chapter 18.53 RCW;
(vii) The board of osteopathic medicine and surgery as established
in chapter 18.57 RCW governing licenses issued under chapters
18.57 and 18.57A RCW;
(viii) The board of pharmacy as established in chapter 18.64
RCW governing licenses issued under chapters 18.64 and 18.64A
RCW;
(ix) The medical quality assurance commission as established
in chapter 18.71 RCW governing licenses and registrations issued
under chapters 18.71 and 18.71A RCW;
(x) The board of physical therapy as established in chapter 18.74
RCW;
(xi) The board of occupational therapy practice as established
in chapter 18.59 RCW;
(xii) The nursing care quality assurance commission as established
in chapter 18.79 RCW governing licenses and registrations issued
under that chapter;
(xiii) The examining board of psychology and its disciplinary
committee as established in chapter 18.83 RCW; and
(xiv) The veterinary board of governors as established in chapter
18.92 RCW.
(3) In addition to the authority to discipline license holders, the
disciplining authority has the authority to grant or deny licenses
based on the conditions and criteria established in this chapter and
the chapters specified in subsection (2) of this section. This chapter
also governs any investigation, hearing, or proceeding relating
to denial of licensure or issuance of a license conditioned on the
applicant’s compliance with an order entered pursuant to RCW
18.130.160 by the disciplining authority.
(4) All disciplining authorities shall adopt procedures to ensure
substantially consistent application of this chapter, the Uniform
Disciplinary Act, among the disciplining authorities listed in
subsection (2) of this section.
Sec. 16. RCW 18.130.040 and 2008 c ... (Fourth Substitute House
Bill No. 1103) s 18 are each amended to read as follows:
(1) This chapter applies only to the secretary and the boards
and commissions having jurisdiction in relation to the professions
licensed under the chapters specified in this section. This chapter
does not apply to any business or profession not licensed under the
chapters specified in this section.
(2)(a) The secretary has authority under this chapter in relation
to the following professions:
(i) Dispensing opticians licensed and designated apprentices
under chapter 18.34 RCW;
(ii) Naturopaths licensed under chapter 18.36A RCW;
(iii) Midwives licensed under chapter 18.50 RCW;
(iv) Ocularists licensed under chapter 18.55 RCW;
(v) Massage operators and businesses licensed under chapter
18.108 RCW;
(vi) Dental hygienists licensed under chapter 18.29 RCW;
(vii) Acupuncturists licensed under chapter 18.06 RCW;
(viii) Radiologic technologists certified and X-ray technicians
registered under chapter 18.84 RCW;
(ix) Respiratory care practitioners licensed under chapter 18.89
RCW;
(x) Persons registered under chapter 18.19 RCW;
(xi) Persons licensed as mental health counselors, marriage
and family therapists, and social workers under chapter 18.225
RCW;
(xii) Persons registered as nursing pool operators under chapter
18.52C RCW;
(xiii) Nursing assistants registered or certified under chapter
18.88A RCW;
(xiv) Health care assistants certified under chapter 18.135
RCW;
(xv) Dietitians and nutritionists certified under chapter 18.138
RCW;
(xvi) Chemical dependency professionals certified under chapter
18.205 RCW;
(xvii) Sex offender treatment providers and certified affiliate
sex offender treatment providers certified under chapter 18.155
RCW;
(xviii) Persons licensed and certified under chapter 18.73 RCW
or RCW 18.71.205;
(xix) Denturists licensed under chapter 18.30 RCW;
(xx) Orthotists and prosthetists licensed under chapter 18.200
RCW;
(xxi) Surgical technologists registered under chapter 18.215
RCW;
(xxii) Recreational therapists;
(xxiii) Animal massage practitioners certified under chapter
18.240 RCW; ((and))
(xxiv) Athletic trainers licensed under chapter 18.250 RCW;
and
(xxv) Home care aides certified under chapter 18. -- RCW (the
new chapter created in section 18 of this act).
(b) The boards and commissions having authority under this
chapter are as follows:
(i) The podiatric medical board as established in chapter 18.22 
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted by the Sponsor. The Office of the Secretary of State has no editorial authority. 47
Complete Text of
INITIATIVE MEASURE 1029
(continued)
RCW;
(ii) The chiropractic quality assurance commission as established
in chapter 18.25 RCW;
(iii) The dental quality assurance commission as established
in chapter 18.32 RCW governing licenses issued under chapter
18.32 RCW and licenses and registrations issued under chapter
18.260 RCW;
(iv) The board of hearing and speech as established in chapter
18.35 RCW;
(v) The board of examiners for nursing home administrators as
established in chapter 18.52 RCW;
(vi) The optometry board as established in chapter 18.54 RCW
governing licenses issued under chapter 18.53 RCW;
(vii) The board of osteopathic medicine and surgery as established
in chapter 18.57 RCW governing licenses issued under chapters
18.57 and 18.57A RCW;
(viii) The board of pharmacy as established in chapter 18.64
RCW governing licenses issued under chapters 18.64 and 18.64A
RCW;
(ix) The medical quality assurance commission as established
in chapter 18.71 RCW governing licenses and registrations issued
under chapters 18.71 and 18.71A RCW;
(x) The board of physical therapy as established in chapter 18.74
RCW;
(xi) The board of occupational therapy practice as established
in chapter 18.59 RCW;
(xii) The nursing care quality assurance commission as established
in chapter 18.79 RCW governing licenses and registrations issued
under that chapter;
(xiii) The examining board of psychology and its disciplinary
committee as established in chapter 18.83 RCW; and
(xiv) The veterinary board of governors as established in chapter
18.92 RCW.
(3) In addition to the authority to discipline license holders, the
disciplining authority has the authority to grant or deny licenses.
The disciplining authority may also grant a license subject to
conditions.
(4) All disciplining authorities shall adopt procedures to ensure
substantially consistent application of this chapter, the Uniform
Disciplinary Act, among the disciplining authorities listed in
subsection (2) of this section.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 17. The definitions in RCW 74.39A.009
apply throughout [chapter 18. RCW (the new chapter created
in section 18 of this act)] unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 18. Sections 4, 6, 7, 13, and 17 of this
act constitute a new chapter in Title 18 RCW.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 19. The provisions of this act are to be
liberally construed to effectuate the intent, policies, and purposes
of this act.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 20. If any provision of this act or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
remainder of the act or the application of the provision to other
persons or circumstances is not affected.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 21. This act may be known and cited as
the better background checks and improved training for long-term
care workers for the elderly and persons with disabilities initiative
of 2008.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 22. Section 11 of this act takes effect
September 1, 2009.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 23. Section 15 of this act does not take
effect if section 18, chapter ... (Fourth Substitute House Bill No.
1103), Laws of 2008 is signed into law by April 6, 2008.
NEW SECTION. Sec. 24. Section 16 of this act takes effect if
section 18, chapter ... (Fourth Substitute House Bill No. 1103),
Laws of 2008 is signed into law by April 6, 2008.
PLEASE NOTE
In the text of the measures, any language in double
parentheses with a line through it is existing state
law and will be taken out of the law if the measure is
approved by voters. Any underlined language does
not appear in current state law but will be added to the
law if the measure is approved by voters.
48 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
U.S. President and Vice President
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: United States Senator
Education: Graduated from Columbia University and Harvard
Law School where he was elected President of the Harvard Law
Review by his fellow students.
Elected Experience: Served 8 years as Illinois State Senator;
Currently a U.S. Senator
Family: Senator Obama and his wife Michelle are proud parents
of two daughters, Sasha, 7 and Malia, 10.
Significant Career Experience: Two decades ago, Senator
Obama walked away from a career on Wall Street to work as
a community organizer where he helped rebuild communities
devastated by plant closings. He went on to become a civil rights
lawyer and a Constitutional Law Professor at the University of
Chicago.
Candidate Statement
At this defining moment in our nation’s history, we have an
opportunity to keep the American promise alive. Through hard
work, we can pursue our individual dreams but still come together
as one American family to ensure the next generation can pursue
their dreams as well.
I’m running for President to turn the page on the failed politics of
the past: politics that divide us instead of unite us, politics where
lobbyists write the laws and where the interests of the wealthiest
few are put before those of hard-working Americans.
From declining wages to the cost of gas, families are struggling. As
president, I’ll bring Democrats and Republicans together to solve
the problems we face. I’ll invest in affordable, renewable sources of
energy to create millions of jobs, reduce our dependence on foreign
oil, and protect the planet. I’ll end tax breaks to corporations that
ship jobs overseas and put a middle-class tax cut into the pockets
of working families, struggling homeowners, and seniors who
deserve a secure retirement.
(Democratic Party Nominee)
Vice President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: United States Senator
Education: Graduated from the University of Delaware and
Syracuse University Law School
Elected Experience: New Castle County Councilman (Delaware),
currently a U.S. Senator
Family: Married to Jill Jacobs and has three grown children: Beau,
Hunter and Ashley. Beau currently serves as Delaware’s Attorney
General; a captain in the 261st Signal Brigade of the Delaware
National Guard, he will be deployed to Iraq this October. Ashley
is a social worker and Hunter is an attorney. He also has five
grandchildren: Naomi, Finnegan, Roberta Mabel, Natalie, and
Robert Hunter.
Significant Career Experience: Attorney, county councilman,
and constitutional law professor.
Barack Obama
I’ll ensure that men and women receive equal pay for equal work.
I’ll ensure all Americans have access to quality, affordable health
care, just like the plans Members of Congress give themselves.
I’ll invest in early childhood education, recruit a new generation
of teachers and make college affordable for anyone who wants to
go. I’ll end the war in Iraq responsibly – a war I opposed from the
start – and finish the fight against al Qaeda and the Taliban. I’ll lock
down loose nuclear weapons, and uphold our sacred commitment
to veterans and their families.
We can no longer pit Blue States against Red States. To overcome
the challenges we face as a nation, we must unite in common
cause and work together to restore the promise that makes America
great.
Obama for America
1310 Mercer Street
Seattle, WA 98109
Telephone: 877-WACHANGE
Website: www.wa.barackobama.com
(Democratic Party Nominee)
Joe Biden
(Page 1 of 8)
49 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
U.S. President and Vice President
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Page 2 of 8)
President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: U.S. Senator
Education: Graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy
Elected Experience: U.S. House of Representatives; U.S. Senate
Family: Wife Cindy; seven children
Significant Career Experience: Naval aviator; Navy Liaison to
U.S. Senate.
John McCain has a remarkable record of leadership and has always
put our country first. He has been a consistent leader in the fight to
reform Washington, eliminate wasteful government spending and
lower taxes. John McCain will also continue his fight to achieve
strategic energy independence from foreign oil and get our economy
back on track.
Candidate Statement
In war and peace, I have been a dedicated servant of our country.
Whenever I faced an important choice between our country’s
interests, party politics or special interests, I chose our country.
I will continue to put our country first by ushering in a new era
of reform, prosperity and peace. If I’m elected President, the era
of the permanent campaign will end. The era of problem solving
will begin. Washington is broken, and I intend to fix it. All you’ve
ever asked of government is that it stand on your side, not in your
way.
I will stand by your side to grow this economy, create more
jobs and get America moving again. I will aggressively push to
develop alternative energies while expanding our use of existing
(Republican Party Nominee)
Vice President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Governor of Alaska
Education: The University of Idaho
Elected Experience: Governor of Alaska; Mayor of Wasilla
Family: Husband Todd; five children
Significant Career Experience: During her first legislative session, Governor Palin’s administration passed two major pieces of
legislation – an overhaul of the state’s ethics laws and a competitive
process to construct a gas pipeline. She created Alaska’s Petroleum
Systems Integrity Office to provide oversight and maintenance of
oil and gas equipment, facilities and infrastructure, and the Climate
Change Subcabinet to prepare a climate change strategy for Alaska.
She serves as Chair of the Oil & Gas Compact Commission and
Chair of the National Governors Association Natural Resources
Committee.
John McCain
energy resources here at home. As President, I intend to provide
future generations of Americans with a safer, more peaceful world
than the one we inherited. We will achieve energy security and
ensure that healthcare is affordable and available for all. It is
incumbent on America, more than any other nation on earth, to
lead in building the foundations for a stable and enduring peace.
I will put an agenda of reform, prosperity and peace for America
before any partisan interest or special interest. I will keep that
promise every hour of every day I am in office.
McCain – Palin 2008
PO Box 16118
Arlington, VA 22215
Website: www.johnmccain.com
(Republican Party Nominee)
Sarah Palin
50 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
U.S. President and Vice President
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Consumer Advocate
Education: AB magna cum laude from the Woodrow Wilson
School of International Affairs at Princeton University. He
received an LLB with distinction from Harvard Law School.
Significant Career Experience: Instrumental in the passage
of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, the Freedom of
Information Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, the Clean Air
Act, and the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Founder of hundreds of non-profit organizations, including Public
Citizen, the Pension Rights Center, the Public Interest Research
Groups, and the Center for the Study of Responsive Law. Named
one of Time magazine’s “100 Most Influential Americans in the
Twentieth Century.”
Candidate Statement
Chances are, your quality of life is better because of Ralph
Nader.
The cars we drive, the air we breathe and the water we drink
are all safer because of his forty years of public service. Called
America’s most important private citizen, Nader has built up a
legislative record of progressive reform that eclipses most modern
presidents.
He has saved lives, opened minds, implemented solutions, and
inspired citizens to build a better world. He has tirelessly worked
for justice for all, and is known for his ethics, integrity, and
independence.
It’s time for real progressive change.
It’s time to break the stranglehold that corporations and their
lobbyists have on our government and Shift the Power in this
country from the few back to the many.
It’s time to end the current “pay or die” healthcare system and adopt
universal, single-payer healthcare.
(Independent Candidate)
Vice President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Civil Rights Attorney
Education: He received a Bachelor’s degree from Columbia
College, Columbia University, 1987, and a Juris Doctor from
Stanford Law School in 1990.
Elected Experience: San Francisco Board of Supervisors (2000-
2005); Board President (2003-2005).
Significant Career Experience: Implemented the highest
minimum wage in the country in San Francisco. Successfully
fought for electoral reform (Instant Run-Off Voting). Oversaw
an economy with a budget of $6 billion. In 2003, narrowly lost
campaign for San Francisco Mayor as a Green Party candidate.
Ralph Nader
It’s time to end the war and occupation of Iraq and bring all of our
soldiers home in a rapid, responsible withdrawal, to be completed
within six months.
It’s time to reclaim our Bill of Rights and repeal attacks on our civil
liberties like the so-called PATRIOT Act, imprisonment without
charges, systemic torture, and warrantless domestic spying.
It’s time to cut the wasteful and bloated military budget and invest
instead in a public works program to fix our crumbling public
schools, libraries, public transit, and create millions of good-paying
jobs that can’t be exported.
It’s time to end “pull down” corporate trade agreements like
NAFTA, and predicate all trade policy on the defense of worker’s
rights and the environment.
It’s time for a leader with the political will to implement these
majoritarian redirections for our country. A leader who will never
talk down to you, never pander to you, never betray you.
It’s time for Ralph Nader.
Nader for President 2008
PO Box 34103
Washington, DC 20043
Telephone: (202) 471-5833
Email: contact@votenader.org
Website: www.votenader.org
(Independent Candidate)
Matt Gonzalez
(Page 3 of 8)
51 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
U.S. President and Vice President
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Page 4 of 8)
President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: President, Typographical Sector,
Media Workers Union, Local 39521, CWA (Communication
Workers of America)
Education: Brandeis University
Elected Experience: Union president since 2002. Peace and
Freedom Party nominee, California governor, 1994, 1998.
Elected National Committee member, Party for Socialism and
Liberation.
Significant Career Experience: Labor, progressive, community
organizer for 35 years. Led union drive, Rochester, NY, 1979.
Organizer, speaker at mass anti-war, immigrant rights rallies.
Volunteer, ANSWER Coalition (Act Now to Stop War and End
Racism). Coordinated medical shipments, traveled to Iraq to
oppose U.N./U.S. sanctions. Traveled to New Orleans after
Hurricane Katrina and Iowa after flooding. Coordinator, National
Committee to Free the Cuban Five.
Candidate Statement
Eugene Puryear and I are candidates of the Party for Socialism
and Liberation. The PSL is a party of the working class—the vast
majority. Our party is active in many struggles that affect working
people.
The United States is the richest country in the world. Every person
should have the right to free health care, education, job training,
childcare, affordable food and housing, and a good job with full
benefits. Under capitalism, the wealth created by workers is unjustly
controlled by the rich. Their economic decisions are based on
maximizing profits, regardless of the cost to people or the planet.
The PSL stands for putting peoples’ needs first. We stand against
racism, national oppression and for full rights for immigrants.
We oppose sexism and support women’s reproductive rights. We
stand for full equality for the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
community. The PSL supports affirmative action, bilingual
education and disability rights, and opposes police brutality, mass
imprisonment and the death penalty. We stand for a system that is
environmentally sustainable.
(Socialism & Liberation Party Nominee)
Vice President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Student; community organizer
in Washington, D.C.; progressive activist on national and
international issues.
Education: Howard University
Elected Experience: Elected National Committee member, Party
for Socialism and Liberation
Significant Career Experience: Organizer, speaker at mass antiwar rallies in Washington, D.C.; volunteer with the ANSWER
Coalition (Act Now to Stop War and End Racism); activist in the
movement to Free the Jena 6 of Louisiana; member of Coalition
to Save Our Neighborhood Schools, which opposes public school
closures; member of Coalition for Peace, which organizes annual
Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Peace Walk; Editorial Board
member and contributor, Liberation newspaper and Socialism
and Liberation journal
Gloria La Riva
The PSL calls for an immediate end to the Iraq and Afghanistan
wars, the blockade of Cuba, and all U.S. interventions, sanctions
and “free” trade agreements. We want a foreign policy based on
friendship and equality, not imperialist domination.
The PSL calls for a rollback in energy prices and nationalization
of the energy and utility companies.
Workers are asked to vote every four years for who will oppress
them for the next four years. Real change comes not as a gift from
politicians, but when the people organize to fight for their rights.
The PSL provides a true alternative to the Democrats and
Republicans who represent the interests of the military-industrial
complex, banks and Big Oil.
Vote Socialism and Liberation – Vote La Riva/Puryear!
Socialism & Liberation
1122 E Pike #1289
Seattle, WA 98122
Telephone: (206) 367-3820
Email: seattle@VotePSL.org
Website: www.VotePSL.org
(Socialism & Liberation Party Nominee)
Eugene Puryear
52 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
U.S. President and Vice President
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
President Biographical Information
Significant Career Experience: James Harris, 60, is a socialist
who has been an activist in the fight for Black rights and in the
union movement for decades. He is a meatpacker and a member
of the United Food and Commercial Workers Union (UFCW).
Harris supports full legalization for all immigrants. He is for the
immediate withdrawal of all U.S. troops from Iraq, Afghanistan
and everywhere else. Harris is an active campaigner for the
immediate release from prison of the Cuban 5, who are Cuban
revolutionaries who have been framed up and imprisoned by the
U.S. government for the past 10 years.
Candidate Statement
The biggest capitalist financial crisis since the Great Depression of
the 1930s is taking a grinding toll on workers and farmers worldwide.
Today the billionaire ruling families and their spokespeople in the
U.S. are trumpeting the success of their many-year long efforts to
undermine our wages, job conditions and living standards. They’re
celebrating the ground taken in further weakening our unions –
workers’ first line of defense.
What lies ahead for working people will be many years of escalating
antilabor assaults, scapegoating of immigrants, and increasing class
battles. The Socialist Workers campaign offers a course of action
for workers and farmers to defend ourselves and our toiling allies
against the devastating consequences of capitalism’s deepening
world disorder and to advance our own class interests.
Join us in campaigning for the working-class alternative, running
against the capitalist class!
The Socialist Workers Campaign supports workers’ efforts to
organize unions and to extend and use union power to defend
working people.
(Socialist Workers Party Nominee)
Vice President Biographical Information
Significant Career Experience: Alyson Kennedy, 57, is a garment
worker. A socialist and trade union fighter for more than three
decades, she is a member of the Socialist Workers Party’s National
Committee. Kennedy has worked in coal mines in Alabama,
Colorado, Utah, and West Virginia. She joined the United Mine
Workers of America (UMWA) in 1981. From 2003 to 2006 Kennedy
was a leading militant in a union organizing battle at the Co-Op coal
mine outside Huntington, Utah. She joined with truckers protesting
high fuel costs and participated on the front lines of struggles to
defend immigrant workers from government assault.
James E. Harris
The unions must organize the unorganized. The fight for immediate
legalization of all undocumented workers, with no penalties or
conditions, is a matter of life and death for unions today.
The Socialist Workers candidates demand regular cost-of-living
increases in all wages and benefits as well as federal legislation
to shorten the workweek with no cut in pay to spread available
work to all.
The working-class needs our own political party based on a fighting
union movement, to contest against the Democrats, Republicans
and other capitalist parties.
We must build a revolutionary movement of millions to replace
the state power and class rule of a tiny minority. We must establish
a workers and farmers government that can abolish capitalism,
reorganize society in the interests of the vast majority, and join in
the worldwide struggle for socialism.
Socialist Workers 2008 Campaign
5418 Rainier Avenue S
Seattle, WA 98118
Telephone: (206) 323-1755
Email: seattleswp@speakeasy.net
Website: www.themilitant.com
(Socialist Workers Party Nominee)
Alyson Kennedy
(Page 5 of 8)
53 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
U.S. President and Vice President
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Page 6 of 8)
President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Attorney, Law Offices of Edwin
Marger
Education: Graduate of Georgetown University Law Center; MA
in International Affairs from George Washington University; BA
from University of Southern California
Elected Experience: U.S. Congressman
Family: Married to Jeri Barr, two children
Significant Career Experience: Analyst for the Central
Intelligence Agency, 1971-1978; United States Attorney for the
Northern District of Georgia, 1986-1990; Elected to U.S. House of
Representatives, 1995-2003; Board Member of the National Rifle
Association, 1997-present
Candidate Statement
Throughout his distinguished career, Bob Barr has proven that he
is the leader Americans need to restore confidence of the American
people in the future of their nation. Both working for the American
people as a Congressman from Georgia and afterwards partnering
with groups dedicated to protecting civil liberties, Bob has shown
a commitment to shrinking government and giving power back to
the people.
Americans know that the answer to today’s problems is not more
government, and Bob will work tirelessly to cut taxes, reduce
government spending and restore our civil liberties lost during the
Bush administration. Having seen the true nature of government
from inside and out, only Bob Barr has the qualifications, the
passion, and the commitment to work for the American people in
their interest--not the government’s.
(Libertarian Party Nominee)
Vice President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: small business owner
Education: B.A. in Political Science from Columbia University
Family: Married to Debra Root, four children
Significant Career Experience: Host and anchorman on Financial
News Network, 1989-1991; Contributing Sports Editor of The Robb
Report magazine, 1989-1990; Author of the business book The
Joy of Failure!, 1997; Chairman and CEO of his small business,
2000-present; Contributing Editor to Millionaire magazine, 2006-
2007
Bob Barr
Since leaving Congress where he served as the vanguard of the
Second Amendment, Bob worked to increase individual liberty and
privacy rights through such organizations as the Kennedy School of
Government at Harvard University and the American Conservative
Union as the 21st Century Liberties Chair for Freedom and Privacy.
For his work on protecting the privacy and civil liberties of all
Americans, legendary New York Times columnist William Safire
dubbed Bob “Mr. Privacy.”
If there is one candidate who consistently comes down on the side
of the American people’s rights, it is Bob Barr. Bob knows the
answer is less government, and has proven that he will deliver the
real change necessary to lead America into a new era of prosperity
and freedom.
Bob Barr for President
PO Box 725007
Atlanta, GA 31139
Telephone: 1 (800) BOB-BARR
Email: info@BobBarr2008.com
Website: www.BobBarr2008.com
(Libertarian Party Nominee)
Wayne A. Root
54 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
U.S. President and Vice President
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Founder and pastor of Crossroad
Baptist Church in Pensacola, Florida, radio talk show host of Chuck
Baldwin Live for 10 years, columnist, author.
Education: Attended Midwestern Baptist College, graduated from
Liberty Bible Institute at Liberty University and holds a master’s
degree from Christian Bible College. Baldwin holds two honorary
doctor of divinity degrees—from Christian Bible College and
Trinity Baptist College.
Family: Chuck and his wife Connie have three children and six
grandchildren.
Significant Career Experience: Baldwin is a past chair of
the Florida Moral Majority and 2004 Constitution Party Vice
Presidential Candidate.
Candidate Statement
As president, I would measure every issue in light of the
Constitution. I would start the process of bringing our troops home
from Iraq and Afghanistan and the more than 130 countries in which
they are stationed.
I would honor our veterans by ensuring them the best and most
timely medical care. If I were President, I would also do everything
in my power to locate all MIA’s and POW’s.
Instead of guarding borders around the world, I would make sure
our borders at home are sealed and work to end the practice of
hiring of illegal aliens. There would no longer be taxpayer—funded
education, medical care or other benefits for those here unlawfully.
I would encourage Congress to pass Congressman Ron Paul’s
Sanctity of Life Act. This bill would declare that unborn babies are
persons under the law. In addition, under the authority of Article.
III. Section. 2. of the U.S. Constitution, it would remove abortion
from the jurisdiction of the Court.
(Constitution Party Nominee)
Vice President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Attorney in private practice with
firms in Memphis, TN, St. Louis, MO, and Kansas City, MO.
Education: B.A. in History and Political Science, East Tennessee
State University; J.D. degree, Memphis State University Law
School (University of Memphis).
Family: Wife of 30 years, Joan, one grown daughter.
Significant Career Experience: 2nd Lieutenant in the United States
Marine Corps, Viet Nam veteran; Constitution Party of Tennessee
State Chairman, Instructor of the Institute on the Constitution
course; Member, Board of Directors of the Conservative Caucus;
Past Chairman of the National Veterans Coalition; Founder, Mia’s
Children, outreach ministry to homeless children, Bucharest,
Romania.
Chuck Baldwin
I would defend the Constitutional rights of gun owners and
homeschoolers which have suffered egregious attacks on their
rights.
I would work to overturn the so-called Patriot Act, which has gutted
significant portions of our Constitution.
I would end all so-called “free trade” agreements like NAFTA,
and GATT. The NAFTA Superhighway and the proposed North
American Union would no longer be a threat to American
sovereignty.
There is no reason for us to be dependent upon OPEC. We must
begin drilling for the domestic oil we know exists and build more
refineries and nuclear power plants. Gas prices would reflect the
wisdom of relying on our own natural resources.
Americans are counting on a return to limited, Constitutional
government.
Baldwin 2008
5500 Division
Grand Rapids, MI 49548
Telephone: (616) 534-5861
Email: contact@baldwin2008.com
Website: www.baldwin08.com
(Constitution Party Nominee)
Darrell L. Castle
(Page 7 of 8)
55 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
U.S. President and Vice President
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Page 8 of 8)
President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Global Human Rights and
Peace Activist, Public Speaking, Lecturer, and Researcher.
Education: BA, University of Southern California, Los Angeles;
Masters from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts
University; currently a Doctoral Candidate at the University of
California, Berkeley.
Elected Experience: Served six terms in the U.S. Congress and
two terms in the Georgia General Assembly.
Family: Proud mother to a son, Coy, daughter of Billy and Leola
McKinney
Significant Career Experience: Has taught at multiple post
secondary colleges.
Candidate Statement
Cynthia McKinney served 12 years in the United States Congress
where she proved to be a courageous voice for the voiceless
peoples of the nation and the world, speaking truth to power. She
authored legislation that would have: eliminated federal subsidies
for corporations taking jobs overseas; instituted a national livable
wage; repealed the Military Tribunals Act; provided for national
forest protection and restoration; eliminated the use of depleted
uranium weapons; denied federal assistance to law enforcement
agencies violating human rights; allowed 9/11/2001 victims the
right to participate in the Victims Compensation Fund and sue
those responsible; and impeached Bush, Cheney, and Rice.
McKinney successfully extended Agent Orange benefits an
additional 25 years; authorized the USDA disparity study that
demonstrated USDA discrimination against minority farmers,
and directed the Pentagon to study how it handled conscientious
objection.
(Green Party Nominee)
Vice President Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Community Organizer, trainer,
lecturer, independent journalist and Hip-Hop activist.
Education: Graduated with a BA from the State University of
New York, Albany and an MPS from Cornell University.
Elected Experience: No previous publicly elected positions.
Family: Married with a young daughter, Alicia Maria.
Significant Career Experience: Academic research focused on
National Liberation struggles, a youth representative at the 2001
United Nations World Conference against Xenophobia, Racism
and Related Intolerance in South Africa; in 2003, helped form and
coordinate the first ever National Hip Hop Political Convention
(drawing 3000 attendees).
Cynthia McKinney
Cynthia will implement radical common sense solutions to
America’s myriad problems. With a view toward the long term,
she asks us all to be willing to do some things we’ve never done
before in order to have some things we’ve never had before.
The Power to the People Committee is Cynthia’s way of proving
what Bobby Kennedy said so long ago: “Each time a man stands
up for an ideal, or acts to improve the lot of others, or strikes out
against injustice, he sends forth a tiny ripple of hope; and crossing
each other from a million different centers of energy and daring,
those ripples build a current which can sweep down the mightiest
walls of oppression and resistance.”
Power To The People Committee,
Cynthia McKinney for President
PO Box 311759
Atlanta, GA 31131-1759
Website: www.RunCynthiaRun.org/
(Green Party Nominee)
Rosa Clemente
56 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Congressman/United States
House of Representatives
Education: -Graduate of Wheaton College, Illinois - M.D. from the
University of Illinois College of Medicine in Chicago in 1963.
Elected Experience: -service in State Legislature, State Senate -
10 terms in Congress
Candidate Statement
We have tremendous opportunities ahead of us. Working together,
we can move toward a bright, rewarding future. It has been a
privilege to serve you these past two decades, and I ask for your
support as I seek re-election to Washington’s 7th Congressional
District in the United States House of Representatives.
This historic election will choose a Congress eager to reassert our
core American values, and to address forcefully the pressing needs
of our country. Let us begin with an end to the war in Iraq, orderly
withdrawal of our troops, and ongoing care for our soldiers and
veterans. These last difficult years leave a sad legacy of needless
war, staggering debt, and urgent domestic problems. First among
them is a collapsing health care system that forsakes people daily
with little or no access to medical coverage. We must develop a
universal system of health care coverage that is fair, affordable,
simple, and efficient.
I also am fully committed to affordable housing and education;
fair and progressive wages and taxation; environmental protections
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Family: -Married to Therese Hansen - 2 adult children - 3
grandchildren
Significant Career Experience: -physician by training - 38 years
in public service
Jim McDermott
that meaningfully address the crisis of global warming and clean
energy policies that embrace the promise of renewable resources;
reproductive choice; uncompromised civil rights and civil liberties;
and trade policies that respect worker’s rights and protect the
environment.
I look forward, too, to continuing as Chair of the House Ways and
Means’ Subcommittee on Income Security and Family Support.
In addition to family services oversight and unemployment
compensation, the Subcommittee is proposing significant, long
overdue reforms to our foster care system. I am eager to continue
this crucial work.
We have much to do in restoring to our country the esteem of the
international community and the confidence of its citizens. I hope
you will allow me again to represent you in the United States House
of Representatives.
Friends for Jim McDermott
PO Box 21786
Seattle, WA 98111
Telephone: (206) 245-9609
Email: thomas@mcdermottforcongress.com
Website: www.mcdermottforcongress.com
U.S. Congressional District 7
Representative (Partisan Office, 2-year term)
(Page 1 of 2)
57 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
U.S. Congressional District 7
Representative (Partisan Office, 2-year term)
(Page 2 of 2)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Employed by ShopLocal.com
since 2003; currently Director of Operations (Seattle)
Education: Attended City College of New York, 1968-1970
Family: Married, no children; five nieces and two nephews; Steve
is 57 years old; he and his wife live in Seattle and are members of
Christian Faith Center
Candidate Statement
I challenge Congressman McDermott to a series of broadcast
debates.
Let’s sharply reduce government spending, cut taxes, and increase
the federal tax exemption to $25,000/person ($100,000/family of
four). This will increase take-home pay, helping families pay for
their mortgage, education, and healthcare, and helping fund their
retirement. Lower taxes leave businesses more of their own money
to invest, hire, and provide services. Lower taxation increases
liberty, improves the business climate, promotes job growth, and
reduces unemployment.
Ending our dependence on Mideast oil is a national security issue.
We need “all of the above” – nuclear, coal, solar, wind, natural
gas, alternative fuels, and (most important) increased domestic oil
supply. American families are paying a high price for the inaction
of the Pelosi-McDermott Congress. We must increase supply to
reduce prices! Let’s put Americans to work, drilling American oil
in America – for use by Americans!
Illegal immigration hurts the economy, depresses American wages,
cheats legal immigrants, and burdens taxpayers. I’m for secure
borders and against amnesty for illegal immigrants.
(Prefers Republican Party)
Significant Career Experience: Seattle resident since 1987;
former member of Boeing machinists union, 1988-1989;
extensive managerial experience in private industry; speaker,
writer, and activist; 2006 congressional candidate; “five star
conservative” – fiscal conservative, social conservative, national
security conservative, immigration conservative, and optimism
conservative
Steve Beren
Our Constitution recognizes our natural rights – free speech,
the right to bear arms, the freedom to worship. Reliance on
constitutional principles – not more government bureaucracy – best
protects our nation’s future.
I’m committed to the protection of innocent, unborn human life.
McDermott should retract his statement calling our troops in
Afghanistan and Iraq “mercenaries” and felons in a “war on
civilians.” I support our troops and I support their mission – victory
in the war against terrorism.
I’m endorsed by Dino Rossi, Rob McKenna, Slade Gorton, John
Carlson, Kirby Wilbur, Kathy Lambert, Human Life PAC, Gun
Owners Action League, Iraq war veteran Matthew Fritch, and
many others.
Read my platform at www.BerenForCongress.com . Get involved
– volunteer; donate; spread the message; get out the vote. Let’s
change the political atmosphere of the Pacific Northwest!
Steve Beren for Congress
1916 Pike Place Ste 12667
Seattle, WA 98102
Telephone: (206) 335-3659
Email: info@berenforcongress.com
Website: www.berenforcongress.com/ 
58 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Governor, Washington State
Education: J.D., Gonzaga University, 1977; B.A., University of
Washington, 1969
Elected Experience: Attorney General, 1992-2004
Family: First Mike is Governor Gregoire’s biggest supporter and a
great father to their daughters, Courtney and Michelle. The Gregoire
family just welcomed their new son-in-law Scott.
Candidate Statement
The failed policies of the Bush Administration have left Washington
and all of America facing tough times.
Yet, we’re better prepared than most states to weather this storm
because of the fiscally responsible and far-sighted leadership of
Governor Chris Gregoire.
• Gregoire’s prudent budgeting eliminated the $2.2 billion deficit
she inherited, and she created the state’s Rainy Day Fund to protect
against tough times.
• Gregoire helped create over 200,000 new jobs and more new
business start-ups than any other state, even in the face of national
credit and energy crises.
• With family budgets strained, Gregoire passed the 1% cap on
property taxes and opposes a state income tax.
As tough economic times created pressure to forego our priorities,
Governor Gregoire refused to sacrifice our children’s health,
education and safety.
• As a legislator, Dino Rossi tried to slash health care for 46,000
low-income children, but Gregoire stopped those cuts and expanded
health care coverage to 84,000 additional children.
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Significant Career Experience: Governor Gregoire is a proven
leader who has gotten results for Washingtonians by protecting
our communities; providing health care for adults and children;
investing in education; creating jobs and improving our environment
and quality of life. As Attorney General, she successfully fought
to clean up Hanford, stop identity thieves and led the fight to hold
tobacco companies accountable.
Christine Gregoire
• When overcrowded prisons and Rossi’s plan to release criminals
early threatened our safety, Gregoire built 4,000 new prison beds,
required electronic ankle bracelets and increased jail sentences for
sex offenders, resulting in the lowest crime rate in 14 years.
• As Chair of the Ways & Means Committee, Rossi wrote a budget
that slashed voter-approved funding to lower class size and pay
our teachers, but Gregoire listened to voters and invested in our
children’s education.
In these tough times, we need her kind of leadership to continue
taking on tough challenges and getting real results for Washington
families.
The alternative?
A George Bush Republican who will take our state backward by
supporting tax cuts for the wealthy, cutting children’s health care,
opposing comprehensive stem cell research and a woman’s right
to choose.
On November 4th, vote Gregoire for Governor, and keep our state
moving forward.
People for Chris Gregoire
PO Box 2771
Seattle, WA 98109
Telephone: (206) 382-2008
Email: chris@chrisgregoire.com
Website: www.chrisgregoire.com
Governor
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Page 1 of 2)
59 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Governor
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Page 2 of 2)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Commercial Real Estate
Education: B.A., Business Management, Seattle University
Elected Experience: Washington State Senate, 1996-2003
Family: Dino Rossi, the youngest of seven children raised by a
Seattle public schoolteacher and a beautician with Italian, Irish and
Tlingit Alaskan Native heritage, grew up in Mountlake Terrace.
Dino and his wife Terry now live in Sammamish with their four
children.
Candidate Statement
Dino Rossi – A governor who will fix some problems…for a
change.
Governors in other states are controlling spending - but not here.
While unemployment rises and families tighten their belts, state
government spends more money creating a growing $2.7 billion
deficit. The incumbent’s answer: more tax increases.
Dino Rossi is a businessman. He’ll watch our tax dollars like a hawk
and cut waste, because the answer to Washington’s challenges isn’t
always to spend more tax money, but to spend our money wisely.
Washingtonians must be safe. More than 1300 convicted sex
offenders threaten families here because the state allowed them to
register as “homeless,” so they can’t be tracked. Over 3100 violent
felons were released early from prison. Dino will take action his
first day in office to change these policies.
Other Governors are reforming education and helping prepare
students for global competition. More money is spent in education
each year here, but fewer than half of our students can pass all parts
of the WASL exam. The incumbent still supports the WASL test
(Prefers G.O.P. Party)
Significant Career Experience: In 2003, as Chair of the Senate
Ways & Means Committee, he built a bipartisan coalition to balance
the largest budget deficit in state history without raising taxes while
still protecting the poor and vulnerable. He was the GOP nominee
for Governor in 2004.
Dino Rossi
with no math and science requirement. Dino Rossi will replace the
WASL with a proven standardized test modeled after successful
exams from other states and require students to meet fair and
rigorous standards.
Other states are making progress fixing traffic congestion. Here,
the incumbent raised gas taxes to the nation’s highest but commute
times just get longer, while critical transportation projects are over
budget and years behind schedule. Dino Rossi’s specific plan will
fix nine major traffic chokepoints without more taxes and provide
incentives to purchase environmentally friendly hybrid and electric
vehicles.
Christine Gregoire says we should be satisfied – Dino Rossi knows
Washington state can do so much better.
Let’s fix some problems for a change…vote Dino Rossi.
Dino Rossi for Governor
PO Box 52908
Bellevue, WA 98015
Telephone: (425) 498-2008
Email: info@dinorossi.com
Website: www.dinorossi.com 
60 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Lieutenant Governor, State of
Washington
Education: Graduate of Frankfurt American High School,
Frankfurt, Germany; Honorary Doctorate Walla Walla University
Elected Experience: Lieutenant Governor 1997-present, State
Senate 1983-1997, State House of Representatives 1976-1983,
City of Shelton Finance Commissioner 1976-1980
Family: Married to wife Linda, 3 daughters, 3 adopted sons 2 from
Korea, 13 grandchildren
Significant Career Experience: Boeing worker, Small Businessman
for 22 years, Founder, Manager and President of Strategies for
Youth since 1989
Candidate Statement
Brad Owen is an accomplished leader who gets things done! He
was elected as Washington State’s fifteenth lieutenant governor in
1996 and reelected by large majorities in his last two campaigns.
Brad Owen is dedicated to making Washington a state for healthy
kids and safe communities. He has made substance abuse prevention
and child welfare a top priority of his office. As president of
Strategies of Youth, he travels throughout the state with his musical,
multi media program to deliver positive messages about substance
abuse and bullying awareness to youth. He partnered with the
National Shooting Sports Foundation to promote Project ChildSafe,
which distributed 240,000 free safety gunlocks throughout the state
and is co-chair of Washington State Mentors.
Brad Owen is a strong advocate for economic development. He
has traveled throughout the world promoting Washington State’s
products and economy. He was recently awarded the Spanish
order of knighthood by order of the King of Spain for his work in
promoting economic development, education, culture and peace.
Brad Owen is an avid sportsman and environmentalist. He will
continue to work to maintain our unique lifestyle that centers on
our love for the outdoors.
Marcia McCraw
Brad Owen
Marcia McCraw for Lt. Governor
300 Queen Anne Avenue #709
Seattle, WA 98109
Telephone: (206) 286-1498
Email: marcia@marciamccraw4ltgov.com
Website: www.marciamccraw4ltgov.com
Weitzmann Institute of Science and Technology; Pacific Science
Center; Woodland Park Zoological Society
Candidate Statement
If you elect me Lt. Governor of Washington, I will support open
and transparent government conducting the official duties fairly
and honestly.
I will use public service to promote what is best in Washington.
I have lived in Asia and worked in international trade. Trade and
tourism offer great benefits to the people of Washington. Whether
they grow apples or wheat, bottle wine, build airplanes or write
code, people in these businesses are the backbone of Washington.
I will work to keep them strong.
You may have noticed that when any problem surfaces, Olympia
mandates expensive programs.
My community experience has shown me that we have the
opportunity to incorporate the power of volunteerism into our state.
Using technology and thousands of willing volunteer organizations,
we can create a statewide database that matches willing volunteers
and those who need our help – the aged, the homeless, at-risk youth,
every good cause.
Let’s put the energy of Washingtonians to work now.
I’m running for Lieutenant Governor to work with you to renew
Washington. It is time to change one party rule in Olympia and
embrace diversity and balanced opinion.
I ask for your support and vote.
Lieutenant Governor
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
Citizens for Lieutenant Governor
Brad Owen
PO Box 1426
Shelton, WA 98584
Telephone: (360) 349-4641
Email: bradowen@msn.com
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Licensed to practice law:
Washington; New York; California and Hawaii. Specialize in health
care; hospitality; business law.
Education: Cornell University; Hong King University; Western
New England College School of Law. Speak fluent Mandarin
Chinese; conversational French; Spanish and Japanese
Elected Experience: Makiki Council, Honolulu, Hawaii
Family: Divorced; two adult children
Significant Career Experience: Administrative Law Judge,
New York State Dept. of Labor; Director, Legal Affairs - Aegis
Living; Director of Administration AFM Hospitality Co; Volunteer/
Community: USO Puget Sound Board; AIPAC; U.S. Holocaust
Memorial Museum Council; United Way of King County; YWCA;
(Prefers Republican Party)
61 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Secretary of State
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Prefers Republican Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Secretary of State since 2001.
Education: Attended Washington State University and earned
a Bachelor’s Degree in Social Studies and Master’s Degree in
Political Science.
Elected Experience: Two terms as Secretary of State, and five
terms as Thurston County Auditor.
Family: Sam and Margie have been married for more than 40
years and have two children and two grandchildren. Secretary
Reed, whose family lived in Washington in territorial days,
grew up in Wenatchee. His family moved to Spokane where he
graduated from Lewis and Clark High School.
Significant Career Experience: Served as Assistant Secretary
of State. Served as Director of the Governor’s Urban Affairs and
Constitutional Reform Commissions.
Candidate Statement
As your Secretary of State, Sam Reed knows that there is no
greater responsibility than ensuring the integrity of our elections.
He protected voter privacy, fought for the citizens’ right to control
their electoral process, preserved and made more accessible
our state’s historical resources, and made government more
responsive, responsible and accessible to the people.
Over the next four years, Sam will use the State Library, State
Archives, and State Elections Division to bring you the most
comprehensive election information in the country. He will work
to preserve and make accessible our history, heritage, genealogy,
and culture through innovative technology. He will continue
to bring a new level of government transparency and customer
service.
“In my first two terms as your Secretary of State, I worked hard
to champion the most extensive election reforms since statehood,
develop the first Digital Archives in the nation, and save the 155-
year old Washington State Library. We have more work to do to
restore our faith in democracy, renew trust in government, and
preserve our history. I ask for your continued support and for
your vote. Together we can continue the effort to build a better
Washington!” – Sam Reed
Jason Osgood
Sam Reed
Friends of Jason Osgood
PO Box 30805
Seattle, WA 98113-0805
Telephone: (206) 524-4108
Email: info@jasonosgood.com
Website: www.jasonosgood.com
Volunteered for Audubon Society, various environmental causes.
Candidate Statement
The Secretary of State is Washington’s Chief Elections Officer.
This person is responsible for protecting the fundamentals of
democracy – our ballots and ballot boxes.
I seek your vote, as the incumbent has compromised his duty to
Washington voters:
Protect Voter Privacy
The incumbent put a barcode on our ballots. This allows anyone
who requests the raw data to track how you voted. This is a gross
violation of our voter privacy.
He did this in 25 counties. We fought and stopped him in King
County with an ordinance. As Secretary of State, I will ban these
barcodes statewide and restore the sanctity of the secret ballot.
Election Integrity
The incumbent approves models of vote counting machines that
make it impossible to verify the accuracy of our elections. Many
studies have exposed these machines as risky and flawed. Using
these machines leaves our democracy at the mercy of vendors like
Diebold.
As Secretary of State and a technology expert, I will immediately
conduct a top-down review of our voting machines, as done in
California. I will make the vendors either shape up or ship out!
Washington needs a new Secretary of State — because our elections
are too important to risk.
Citizens for Sam Reed
PO Box 522
Olympia, WA 98507
Email: HQ@SamReed.org
Website: www.SamReed.org
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: MedPlus, Inc.
Elected Experience: Precinct Committee Officer
Family: I’m proud of my son, an Eagle Scout, who is in high
school.
Significant Career Experience: Co-founder of Washington
Citizens for Fair Elections. Nationally recognized advocate for
election integrity. Opinion blogger focusing on elections and open
government. Served many years as a poll inspector and observer.
Over twenty years experience developing software. This includes
project management, requirements analysis, design, implementation,
training, human resources, group facilitation, quality assurance, and
testing. My current product improves patient care, controls costs.
This is a typically complex project, requiring balancing the interests
of many stakeholders.
(Prefers Democratic Party)
62 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
(Prefers Republican Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Assistant State Treasurer
Education: Washington State University, BA in Social Sciences,
magna cum laude.
Family: Married to Sue Martin. Three adult children.
Significant Career Experience: Allan Martin served as Chelan
County Treasurer 1993 – 1998. As Deputy State Treasurer for
Debt Management, 1999 to 2007, he implemented two successful
programs that lower borrowing costs for Washington communities,
oversaw the issuance of $13 billion in bonds and served as
Secretary to the State Finance Committee. Since 1999 he has
served on the Washington State Housing Finance Commission.
His finance career began as a community banker working with
first-time homebuyer programs and builder loans.
Candidate Statement
As your current Assistant State Treasurer – the Treasurer’s top
deputy – I’m honored to receive bipartisan support for State
Treasurer. Retiring State Treasurer Mike Murphy, a Democrat,
says “I enthusiastically endorse Allan Martin.” Other bipartisan
endorsements include 45 current and former County Treasurers
– Republicans and Democrats – from across the state. These
treasurers know that this office – one of the largest banking
operations in our state – is too important to sacrifice professional
management for partisan politics or on-the-job training.
My experience running the daily operation of the office demonstrates my proven ability to manage and invest your tax dollars
prudently and wisely. My professional experience is well balanced
– in public office and private industry, and with experience both
in Olympia and the local level. I worked in community banking
prior to being elected Chelan County Treasurer in 1993. Since
joining the State Treasurer in 1998, I implemented innovative and
successful programs to provide low-cost borrowing for school
districts and local governments. Being State Treasurer is about
integrity, expecting excellence, and delivering it.
My wife Sue and I, both lifelong Washingtonians, are now asking
for the best endorsement of all: your vote for Allan Martin for
State Treasurer. Thank you.
Jim McIntire
Allan Martin
Citizens for Jim McIntire
PO Box 21941
Seattle, WA 98111
Telephone: (206) 382-4531
Email: info@jimmcintire.com
Website: www.jimmcintire.com
Candidate Statement
The only candidate with private, public, and academic experience,
State Representative Jim McIntire brings 30 years of hands-on financial
leadership and a needed focus on public accountability to the office of
State Treasurer.
The Right Experience:
Chair of the Washington Economic and Revenue Forecast Council,
McIntire demands that forecasts be non-partisan and accurate.
McIntire chaired four bi-partisan fiscal committees in the Legislature. As
Finance Committee Chair, Jim won audits of spending and tax breaks.
He sponsored voter-approved “Rainy Day” fund legislation.
A private-sector economist, McIntire helps businesses and investors
succeed.
A 25-year UW faculty member, McIntire teaches graduate students in
public administration.
The Right Values:
Voters elect the Treasurer to keep the office accountable. The Treasurer
must protect taxpayers and build equity with sound investments, not
simply maintain a bureaucracy.
A consistent voice for financial accountability, Jim will reform the office
to allow thorough audits and work with the Governor and Legislature
on a responsible, long term finance plan.
The Right Choice:
Endorsements: Washington Education Assn, State Labor Council,
Credit Union League, NARAL, Washington Technology Industry, 5
Governors, former Treasurer Dan Grimm, Auditor Brian Sonntag, a
bi-partisan legislative majority, major county treasurers and assessors,
dozens of business and community leaders.
State Treasurer
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
Committee to Elect Allan Martin
PO Box 4282
Tumwater, WA 98501
Telephone: (360) 754-7761
Email: allan@allanmartin.org
Website: www.AllanMartin.org
Biographical Information
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Current Occupation/Employer: • State Representative, 46th District;
1998-current • Economist, Navigant Consulting, Inc.; 1999-current
• Faculty, UW Evans School of Public Affairs; 1983-current
Education: • PhD, Economics, UW • Master of Public Policy, Univ.
Michigan • BA, Macalester
Elected Experience: • State Representative, 46th District; 1998-current
Family: • Three children; graduated Seattle Public Schools
Significant Career Experience: • Chair, Economic and Revenue
Forecast Council, 2003-current • Chair, House Finance Committee, 2003-06 • Director, UW Fiscal Policy Center; 1993-98 • Chair,
Washington Community Economic Revitalization Board; 1994-98
• Chair, Common Ground (nonprofit housing developer) 1992-98
• Fiscal Policy Advisor, Governor Booth Gardner; 1985-88 • Research
Scientist, Battelle; 1983-85 
63 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
State Auditor
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Way, Boys and Girls Club; YMCA volunteer, youth baseball and
basketball coach.
Candidate Statement
“A real champion for Washington’s taxpayers. Trust, Independence,
Integrity, accountability. That’s Brian,” former Governor Booth
Gardner.
Brian defines accountability as “government that is open, accessible,
responsive, listens to people and tells them the truth.” These are the
fundamental issues for this office.
Sonntag received the Newspaper Publisher’s “Freedom’s Light
Award” for making government open and responsive. Fought to
advance rights and protections of state employee whistleblowers.
Used performance audits to identify $3.2 billion in cost savings
and unnecessary spending, and an additional $320 million in
uncollected state debt.
The News Tribune called Brian “a high-profile champion of
government openness and accountability.” The Seattle Times says
he “has risen to meet the higher-and-higher expectations he has set
for his own office and public agencies. Sonntag is a public servant
in the truest sense of the term. Sonntag deserves re-election.”
Sonntag actively engages citizens throughout Washington getting
ideas to make government better. Governing magazine called this
a “one-of-a-kind effort to bring citizens back into the decisionmaking fold.”
Thanks for your overwhelming support in the Primary! Your trust
means a lot.
Please hire Brian Sonntag, your State Auditor.
J. Richard (Dick)
McEntee
Brian Sonntag
Citizens for Dick McEntee
3800 Bridgeport Way W Ste A, PMB 410
University Place, WA 98466
Telephone: (253) 988-7727
Email: info@dickmcentee.com
Website: www.dickmcentee.com
national trade association; President, Human Life; Treasurer,
County Republican Party.
Candidate Statement
In their 2000 endorsement, The Bremerton Sun wrote, “we found
McEntee’s stand on performance audits more attractive than
Sonntag’s.”
Voters passed Initiative 900 in 2005. Now, the Auditor has amassed
over $30 million of our tax dollars—some spent trying to conduct
performance audits—sadly, results are a minuscule amount of over
$1 Billion savings available.
Those with lifetimes in politics—the Auditor (and Governor)—
know only how to collect and spend money, not earn it as citizens
must. Recommendations are hollow without two essential components: (1) a business plan describing elements and organization
needed to achieve objectives, (2) an operating plan to carry out the
process. Merger and Acquisition professionals like McEntee know
how to get this done.
Press reports of Sonntag’s failure to find major fraud should not reflect
on capable field auditors; with spiraling auditing costs, it’s evidence
of his poor leadership—we’re spending more, getting less.
Dick is a proven leader in business and shaping public policy.
His lifetime of loyal and trusted government, public, church and
community service is remarkable. Refreshingly, he will serve
faithfully and not campaign for the next election.
Get truly transparent and accountable government in all offices—
Elect Dick McEntee.
Sonntag2008.com
6824 19th Street W
University Place, WA 98466
Telephone: (253) 279-3258
Email: sonntag2008@harbornet.com
Website: www.sonntag2008.com
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Vice President and Government
Compliance Officer for Edmonds Investment Advisory firm. Management Consulting Company CEO.
Education: Bachelor of Chemical Engineering, Villanova University. American Management Association and IBM Certificates in
Management, Finance and Information Technology.
Elected Experience: Fircrest City Council; Economic Development Corporation of Pierce County; Governor Gardner’s Food
Processing Advisory Commission; 28th District Leader; University
Place Public Safety Commission.
Family: Dick and his late wife Kathy have 6 children and 12 grandchildren. Washington Family of the Year, Knights of Columbus.
Significant Career Experience: Executive, Nalley’s Fine Foods;
served Nation in US Army; St. Joseph Hospital Trustee; President,
(Prefers Republican Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: State Auditor.
Education: University of Puget Sound 1971-1972; Tacoma
Community College 1970-71; Certified Government Financial
Manager; TCC Distinguished Alumni Award 2007.
Elected Experience: Pierce County Clerk, Pierce County Auditor,
State Auditor.
Family: Wife Jann – five sons and three grandchildren. Brian’s
father, Jack, County Auditor 1948-1969. Brother, Dick, served on
Tacoma City Council and Tacoma School Board. Brother, Jack, a
teacher, coach, administrator, Tacoma School District.
Significant Career Experience: National Auditors Performance
Audit Committee; received Newspaper Publishers’ Freedom’s
Light Award and Municipal League’s Warren G. Magnuson Award;
board member Washington Coalition for Open Government, United 
64 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Current Occupation/Employer: Pierce County Executive
Education: [1967] Graduated Stadium High School, Tacoma,
Washington; [1971] Graduated Gonzaga University, Spokane,
Washington, Degree: Political Science B.A. (Honors); [1974]
Graduated Gonzaga University, Spokane, Washington, Degree:
Juris Doctor
Elected Experience: [1982-1986] Tacoma City Councilman;
[1986-2000] Pierce County Prosecuting Attorney; [2001 - Current]
Pierce County Executive
Family: The third of 16 children, John Ladenburg was born in Leavenworth, WA. John married his wife, Connie, 39 years ago. John
and Connie have five grown children and eight grandchildren.
Significant Career Experience: [1976-1986] Managed own
private practice in Tacoma; [1977] Admitted to United States
Supreme Court
Candidate Statement
The status quo isn’t working: Our state ranks among the worst
in consumer fraud, identity theft, predatory lending violations
and soaring fuel costs. Our privacy, security, and economy are
suffering.
A tough 14-year elected prosecutor, Pierce County Executive John
Ladenburg will bring hands-on experience in criminal justice and
consumer protection to an office held by someone who has never
tried a court case.
WASHINGTON IS THE 2ND WORST STATE IN THE NATION
FOR CONSUMER FRAUD AND 9TH WORST FOR IDENTITY
THEFT: John will increase enforcement, and improve tracking
and sentencing. John’s opponent takes large contributions from
payday lenders, car dealerships and insurance companies – leading
to potential conflicts of interest.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION: John has a history of
defending our air, water, and climate; we need an AG who fights
for our quality of life.
SAFEGUARDING KIDS AND SENIORS: Online predators and
scam artists prey on the vulnerable. John has actual courtroom
experience representing victims and will use his skills to punish
those who abuse kids and seniors.
PROTECTING INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS: John will fight efforts to
weaken personal and reproductive rights at the state and federal
level. The special interests have enough lawyers. John Ladenburg
will be OUR Attorney General.
Rob McKenna
John Ladenburg
Re-Elect AG Rob McKenna
PO Box 955
Mercer Island, WA 98040
Telephone: (206) 232-0070
Email: campaign@robmckenna.org
Website: www.robmckenna.org
Candidate Statement
Attorney General Rob McKenna has proven he’s a skilled, capable
leader who protects Washington’s families, children and consumers
from 21st Century crime.
As Washington’s top cop, McKenna increased state protection of
children from sex predators. He clamped down on identity thieves
and successfully fought the methamphetamine epidemic.
McKenna wrote the nation’s first law allowing facilities where
children congregate to ban convicted sex offenders. He also
successfully fought for: • more mandatory prison time for sex
predators • stricter offender registration and • increased penalties
for child pornography possession.
Thanks in large measure to McKenna’s Meth Task Force: •
methamphetamine labs are down 90% vs. 2001 and • meth’s street
price has doubled. His efforts produced new narcotics task forces
and more drug treatment. McKenna also focuses on prevention;
he has personally spoken to 30,000 students about this extremely
dangerous drug.
Since McKenna took office, Washington has dropped six spots in
ID theft rankings. Thanks to his legislation, consumers can now
freeze their credit before they become victims of identity theft.
Rob McKenna personally argued and won two U.S. Supreme Court
victories for Washington voters. Winning the Top Two primary
case means the people – not political parties – choose our election
system.
Attorney General
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
Friends of John Ladenburg
PO Box 1856
Tacoma, WA 98401
Telephone: (253) 241-1034
Email: info@ladenburg.org
Website: www.ladenburg.org
Biographical Information
Biographical Information
Education: Law degree, University of Chicago (member, Law
Review). B.A.’s, Economics & International Studies, University
of Washington (with Honors; student body president).
Family: Rob and Marilyn, his wife of 22 years, have four children.
They make their home in Bellevue and are members of St. Louise
Catholic Parish.
Significant Career Experience: Elected as Attorney General in
2004. Elected to three terms on the King County Council. Attorney,
Perkins Coie law firm. President-elect, Bellevue Community
College Foundation. Volunteer fundraiser, Eastside Domestic
Violence Program. Distinguished Eagle Scout; Executive board
member, Boy Scouts, Chief Seattle Council.
(Prefers Republican Party) 
65 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Commissioner of Public Lands
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Wheat and cattle rancher, 35
years; wheat breeder/scientist, 20 years
Education: BA Haverford College 1967; Ph.D. Molecular Biology,
UC Berkeley, 1971.
Elected Experience: Two-term Okanogan School Board Member
Family: Together, Peter and his wife Georgia raised their five
children on the family ranch. All of his children attended Okanogan
High School. Sadly, Georgia succumbed to cancer in 2003. Peter
has since remarried and is hopeful that one or more of his children
will follow in his footsteps on the ranch.
Significant Career Experience: Former Director of the Washington Department of Agriculture, volunteer wildland firefighter,
WSU regent, and Washington State Conservation Farmer of the
Year, 1983.
Candidate Statement
A lifelong Eastern Washington rancher, Peter Goldmark will restore
integrity to the management of nearly 15 million acres of forest,
rangeland and water resources. He will bring a proven conservation
ethic—demonstrated on his own land—to maximize productivity
and sustainability for jobs, recreation and wildlife.
Renewable Energy; Local Jobs
As a scientist, Peter understands the opportunity to create green
jobs and address climate change through investments in wind,
biomass conversion, and other energy sources. Peter is committed
to reversing Bush Administration policies of dependence on foreign
oil and outsourcing of jobs.
Clean Rivers and Puget Sound
Cleaning up Puget Sound and protecting our state’s waters will
require commitment. Peter will provide needed leadership to
help restore the Puget Sound and protect farms and fish across
the state.
Sustainable Management: Protecting the Public
Every year we lose valuable forestland — along with jobs and
public access—to sprawl and unsustainable logging practices.
Peter will end sweetheart deals that give away public resources
to developers and enforce existing rules that limit clear cuts on
dangerous slopes. Peter will keep our forests open for hunting,
hiking and recreation.
ENDORSED: Washington Education Association, Washington
Labor Council, Washington Conservation Voters; and Senators
Cantwell and Murray.
Doug Sutherland
Committee to Re-Elect Doug Sutherland
PO Box 2375
Olympia, WA 98507
Telephone: (360) 628-8372
Email: doug@dougsutherland.org
Website: www.dougsutherland.org
States Lands Commissioner Association, 2004-05; Current board
member, Mountains to Sound Greenway
Candidate Statement
Doug Sutherland grew up in Eastern Washington working on farms
and fighting forest fires as a smokejumper, so taking care of the
land comes naturally.
Doug knows how important forest jobs are to rural communities.
He replaced outdated forest policies that previously led to massive
fires and habitat destruction. Coming from a union household, he
stands beside workers, instituting new fitness rules for firefighters
– and meeting them himself.
A former small business owner, Doug runs government like a
business because good business and environmentally responsible
stewardship go hand in hand. He led projects offering wind power
to thousands of Washington homes, removing toxins from Puget
Sound and encouraging responsible forestry so family forest
landowners can leave a legacy for their children.
His sustainable forestry plan is the first to protect old growth, dramatically improve forest health, and open thousands of miles of
salmon habitat in forest streams, creating thousands of jobs while
improving water quality.
A collaborative approach and diverse background earned Doug
support from leaders of both parties like Governor Dan Evans and
Democratic House Speaker Brian Ebersole.
Healthy forests, clean water and good jobs are the priorities Doug
learned growing up and are his priorities as Lands Commissioner.
Goldmark for Public Lands
Commissioner
PO Box 12917
Seattle, WA 98111
Telephone: (206) 447-4169
Email: info@votepetergoldmark.com
Website: www.votepetergoldmark.com
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Public Lands Commissioner
Education: B.A. in History, Central Washington University, 2001
“Distinguished Alumni” Award
Elected Experience: Tacoma Mayor, 1982-1990; Pierce County
Executive, 1993-2000
Family: Doug and Grace have six grown children and seven
grandchildren.
Significant Career Experience: Owner, Tacoma Tent and Awning,
1971-92; Chair, Puget Sound Air Quality Authority, 1982-89; Board
member, Tacoma Urban League, 1992-2000; Co-Chair, Commencement Bay Cleanup Action Committee, 1994-95; Co-Chair, Salmon
Task Force, 1995-2000; James Ellis Regional Leadership Award,
1999; US County Executive of the Year, 2000; President, Western
(Prefers Republican Party)
Peter J. Goldmark
66 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Executive Director, Public
School Employees of Washington
Education: M.A. Education, Pacific Lutheran University, 1980;
B.A. Education, University of Idaho, 1975
Elected Experience: Seven years in State House of Representatives; Chairman of House Education Committee
Family: Lives in Eatonville with his wife, Kate, a public school
librarian. They are the parents of three grown sons, one is a public
school teacher, while another is studying to be a teacher.
Significant Career Experience: Elementary and Middle School
teacher; Elementary and High School principal; Recipient:
• National Service Award – American Vocational Association
• President’s Award – Association of Washington School
Principals • Golden Gavel Award – Washington Association of
School Administrators
Candidate Statement
Terry Bergeson has had 12 years to bring reform and change to our
schools. Where are we after 12 years? Still studying how to fund
basic education. Still arguing about how to implement education
reform. It’s time for a change!
The Superintendent of Public Instruction needs to be an
experienced educator and a political leader. Randy Dorn is both.
Randy was an elementary and middle school teacher and, for
10 years, an elementary and high school principal. Randy Dorn
knows the classroom.
But Randy Dorn also knows how to get things done in Olympia.
Randy served seven years in the House of Representatives and was
Chairman of the Education Committee. Today, he is the Executive
Director of Public School Employees of Washington, the state’s
second largest educational employee organization.
Randy Dorn will be a forceful advocate for school funding,
reminding the legislature it is their paramount duty to fully fund a
basic education rather than relying on local levies.
And Randy Dorn will replace the WASL with a testing system that
is more fair, more understandable, and takes less time, so testing
doesn’t dominate curriculum and the school calendar.
It’s time for Randy Dorn. Leadership… for a change.
Randy Dorn
Superintendent of Public Instruction
(Nonpartisan Office, 4-year term)
People for Randy Dorn
PO Box 906
Auburn, WA 98071
Telephone: (253) 833-9253
Email: randy@randydorn2008.com
Website: www.randydorn2008.com
Teresa (Terry) Bergeson
Dr. Teresa “Terry” Bergeson
PO Box 11910
Olympia, WA 98508
Telephone: (360) 539-4792
Email: Terry@TerryBergeson2008.com
Website: www.TerryBergeson2008.com
Candidate Statement
Dr. Teresa “Terry” Bergeson is a lifelong educator who has stood
for students throughout her career. She cares passionately about
our children and has courageously challenged the status quo to
help students from all walks of life achieve academic excellence
in our public schools.
Today Washington schools are accountable, with some of the most
rigorous academic standards in the nation. Terry Bergeson led
the adoption of these standards and stands firm in supporting and
strengthening them.
High standards are working; members of the class of 2008 were the
best prepared students in Washington’s history. More than 92% of
students met new graduation requirements in reading and writing.
Washington leads the nation in SAT and ACT scores. Achievement
for students in all ethnic groups has improved significantly. More
rigorous and relevant career and technical opportunities are
available.
Just as important, Terry’s caring leadership has helped create
schools that pay more personal attention to each student. She
believes every child will stay in school and meet high expectations
with the right kind of support, and she’s helping our schools make
that happen.
Vote for Terry Bergeson. Protect Washington’s high standards and
help all our children build strong foundations for their future.
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: State Superintendent of Public
Instruction
Education: B.A. in English from Emmanuel College, Master’s
Degree in Counseling and Guidance from Western Michigan
University, Doctorate in Education from the University of
Washington.
Significant Career Experience: Dr. Bergeson is a former
classroom teacher, school counselor, school district administrator
and Executive Director of the Washington State Commission on
Student Learning.
67 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Insurance Commissioner
(Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Insurance Commissioner, State
of Washington
Education: Bachelor of Science, Doctor of Optometry; Pacific
University • Masters Degree, Public Health; UCLA
Elected Experience: Mike Kreidler was elected Insurance
Commissioner in 2000. He was re-elected in 2004. He also served
as a school board member, state representative, state senator, and
in the U.S. Congress.
Family: Mike Kreidler and his wife Lela have been married
for more than 40 years and have three children and three
grandchildren.
Significant Career Experience: Mike worked as an optometrist
in the private sector for 20 years. He also owned a successful small
business. Commissioner Kreidler is a retired Lieutenant Colonel
in the U.S. Army Reserves.
Candidate Statement
Mike Kreidler is a strong and independent voice who has stood
up to powerful interests as the state’s top advocate for insurance
consumers.
In his first two terms, Mike Kreidler saved consumers more
than $200 million in auto and homeowners’ insurance by cutting
excessive premium rates proposed by insurance companies.
His free consumer advocacy program helped consumers recover
more than $107 million for policyholders in wrongfully delayed
or denied insurance claims.
Mike Kreidler is eager to continue championing and defending the
rights of insurance consumers to receive fair treatment at a fair price.
The people of our state deserve affordable health insurance and
Mike Kreidler has a specific proposal to cover every Washington
resident, preserve choice and reduce costs. His plan will provide
peace of mind with a guaranteed level of financial security in the
event of a personal health crisis.
Mike Kreidler is a proven leader who has served the people of
Washington with dedication, fairness and hard work. That’s why
he’s consistently earned endorsements from consumer, labor,
business, retiree, educational, and health care organizations and
individuals across our state.
Please join them by retaining Mike Kreidler as your State
Insurance Commissioner.
John R. Adams
Mike Kreidler
1715 W Nickerson Street
Seattle, WA 98119
Telephone: (206) 283-0212
Email: adams-seagen@att.net
Website:
johnadams2008.seattlegeneralagency.com
Candidate Statement
Your Insurance Commissioner must be more than an
administrator.
The Commissioner should be both an advocate for consumers and
a regulator/protector of the insurance industry and possess a good
working knowledge of the applicable laws.
Let’s face it; one of the reasons for higher insurance costs and fewer
options is a lack of consumer choice and resistance to change when
change is needed.
Extreme judgments contribute to the rising insurance costs that
have driven insurance companies from our state and doctors from
their practices. Average families and many businesses cannot afford
medical coverage/benefits.
We have all heard “If it isn’t broke – don’t fix it.” It’s time to wake
up! The system is broke – it does need fixing – we need a level
playing field.
Let’s work for common sense and creative solutions. John is a
Viet Nam veteran with very broad life experience and sense of
fairness.
Help John Adams bring 38 years of professional experience in the
insurance business to the Commissioner’s office. Give him a chance
to begin to fix a broken system.
Vote John Adams for Insurance Commissioner!!
Friends of Mike Kreidler
PO Box 7485
Olympia, WA 98507-7485
Telephone: (360) 704-8313
Email: Mike@MikeKreidler.com
Website: www.mikekreidler.com
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Owner Seattle General
Agency
Education: Graduated from University of Washington / BA
Business Administration. Many specialty industry schools
Elected Experience: Eight years as director; Lake Washington
School Dist. 414
Family: My wife Starr of 39 years, two children and three
grandchildren
Significant Career Experience: Hartford Careen program 1970;
Marne underwriter 70-75; Broker at Marsh Mclennan 75-79;
Wholesale Underwriting 79-89; Own independent agency since
1989.
(Prefers Republican Party) 
68 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Legislative District 11
State Senator (Partisan Office, 4-year term)
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Biographical Information
Education: I graduated from Evergreen State College, and I am
also a classically trained pastry chef.
Family: I am an Army kid, I grew up on bases around the U.S.
and in Europe.
Significant Career Experience: I have over 10 years experience
in public service, working to secure more affordable housing as an
Aide for Congressman Jim McDermott; advocating for homeless
families while with the DSHS; and fighting for middle class tax cuts
as State Field Director of the Tax Fairness Coalition. I currently
serve as a Commissioner for the Seattle Housing Authority and am
a member of the Seattle Central Community College Foundation
Board.
Candidate Statement
With gas prices above $4 a gallon and food prices skyrocketing,
the people of the 11th District need a change in leadership.
We need a Senator that will be the voice of us, not millionaires
and special interests.
I am ready to be that voice.
We need a Senator who will be an advocate for our working
families, focusing on quality schools, reducing the high cost of
living, providing accessible health care for all, and getting us out
of our transportation mess.
Taxpayers are already spending $896 million on sports venues.
This year my opponent led efforts in Olympia to increase that tab
to more than $1.3 billion.
How many stadiums does Senator Prentice think working families
can afford?
She even earned the nickname “Senator MoneyTree” after opposing
caps on the interest predatory payday lenders can charge, and doing
little to help increase our access to fair credit.
These are just two of the issues where we disagree. I will bring a
fresh voice to the legislature.
Working families in the 11th district will be my priority.
Please vote for me, Juan Martinez, and bring a change to Olympia
that represents you and your values.
Margarita Prentice
Juan Martinez
Committee to Elect Margarita Prentice
6245 S Langston Road
Seattle, WA 98178
Telephone: (206) 772-6480
Email: mlprentice@juno.com
Website: www.margaritaprentice.com
Candidate Statement
An Effective, Progressive Leader…
The official 11th LD Democratic Senate nominee, State Senator
Margarita Prentice, is a leader in Olympia who gets results for our
local families.
GOOD JOBS: Margarita knows a strong, growing economy will
provide family wage jobs with benefits. She has invested in worker
training programs, small business expansion, and fought to keep
Boeing in Renton.
QUALITY SCHOOLS: A former school board leader, Margarita
and her children are public school graduates. She has increased
funding for K-12, early learning, and higher education.
AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE: A retired nurse, Margarita has
reduced costs for seniors, expanded coverage for kids and small
businesses.
In Touch With Our Values…
Growing up in the Depression, Margarita learned the core values
of being frugal, working hard, and helping others. She has led on
tough issues – child labor, migrant worker housing, protection of
civil rights, and the impact of globalization. She is a powerful voice
for justice and equality.
“We Endorse Margarita!”—Washington State Labor Council;
Washington Education Association; Washington Conservation
Voters; Washington State Nurses Association; King County
Democrats; Firefighters and Law Enforcement; Representatives
Zack Hudgins and Bob Hasegawa; hundreds more!
Let’s keep her working for us!
Juan Martinez for State Senate
PO Box 2536
Seattle, WA 98111
Telephone: (206) 841-3616
Email: info@juanforsenate.com
Website: www.juanforsenate.com
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Senator 11th District
Education: Phoenix Union High School, Phoenix College,
Youngstown University, attended University of Washington.
Elected Experience: Majority caucus vice chair, chaired Financial
Institutions, Labor, Commerce, Housing, and Insurance Committees;
completing 4th year as chair - Ways & Means Committee. Also
served on Transportation and Education Committees. 14th year as an
ex-officio member of Washington State Gambling Commission.
Family: 3 children, 5 grandchildren, married to Bill 45 years;
widowed in 2003
Significant Career Experience: Registered Nurse (retired);
appointed to House in 1988, elected twice for 2-year terms; elected
to Senate in 1992.
(Prefers Democratic Party) 
69 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Legislative District 11
State Representative Position 1 (Partisan Office, 2-year term)
(Prefers Cut Taxes G.O.P. Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Union Carpenter
Education: Construction Management Certificate, Edmonds
Community College
Elected Experience: For over 30 years my taxes have paid the
salaries of elected politicians
Family: Single
Significant Career Experience: • United States Marine Corps
1972-74 (Vietnam), Cpl/Squad Leader H&S Co. BLT 1/9, 3rd
Marine Division • Rockwell Int’l airframe assembly (Palmdale)
for B-1B Bomber, C-5 Galaxy and P-3 Orion. Awarded B-1B
#70 commendation for tooling innovation and early delivery. • 30
years in construction trades • Professional Designations: Certified
Building Inspector by International Code Council
Candidate Statement
SECURE THE BORDER NOW!
• Unethical hiring of illegal aliens is driving down wages
and dumping costs of crime and welfare upon you, the honest
taxpayer.
• In 2004 alone DSHS gave over $100,000,000 of your tax money
to illegal alien medical care ($57,000,000 pregnancy-related).
(http://www.sao.wa.gov/reports/findings/6534.pdf)
• Democrat bosses killed Republican legislation requiring proof
of legal presence for driver’s licenses. It’s time for change! Send
me to Olympia and I’ll vote in Initiative-409 to eliminate rampant
lawlessness (www.RespectWashington.us) It’s time to put a
working man to work for you in Olympia.
People for Zack Hudgins
4512 S 136th Street
Tukwila, WA 98168
Telephone: (206) 860-9809
Website: www.zackhudgins.com
Family: Zack Hudgins’ father was a Navy pilot who now flies
commercial 747s. His mother has been teaching economics for 30
years. Zack bought his home in Tukwila in 2004.
Significant Career Experience: Zack has worked in both the
public sector and the high technology field.
Candidate Statement
I never forgot why I was first elected to the state legislature,
to help create and protect jobs in our district and Washington
State. While in Olympia, I remember the people I talked to in
our neighborhoods and businesses who are worried about the
economy. That’s why I fought to keep Boeing here, and led a state
task force focused on outsourcing. I voted to put people to work
building more schools and more roads. I would like your support
so that I can go back to Olympia and keep focusing on creating
and protecting our jobs.
Friends for David Morris
4742 42nd Avenue SW #351
Seattle, WA 98116-4553
Telephone: (206) 304-9540
Email: Dave@Morris4U.us
Website: www.Morris4U.us
Biographical Information
Education: In 1990, with scholarships and hard work, Zack
graduated from the University of Notre Dame.
Elected Experience: First elected in 2002, he credits his success
to listening to his constituents. As the Democratic Floor Leader,
Zack is focused on creating good paying jobs with benefits,
protecting the environment, finding transportation solutions, and
making health care more affordable.
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Zack Hudgins
David M. Morris
70 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Legislative District 11
State Representative Position 2 (Partisan Office, 2-year term)
(Prefers Republican Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Special Needs and At-risk
Youth ParaEducator / Highline School District, Law office
Business Manager, Rental property owner.
Education: University of Washington, South Seattle Community
College
Elected Experience: Has never taken one penny of elected official
salary and pledges to never become a full-time legislator.
Family: Proud Father and Grandfather
Significant Career Experience: Scoutmaster and Boy Scout
leader for over 30 years (Troop 270)
Candidate Statement
• Unethical hiring of illegal aliens is driving down your wages and
dumping costs of crime and welfare upon the honest taxpayer.
• In 2004 taxpayer-funded medical care for illegal aliens in
Washington exceeded $100,000,000. How many of your dollars is
Gregoire’s DSHS now handing over to what Democrats and some
Republicans see as their new base of voters? We are being sold
out! Read http://www.sao.wa.gov/reports/findings/6534.pdf
• Send me to Olympia and I’ll vote in Initiative-409 (www.
RepectWashington.us) to eliminate this rampant lawlessness.
Bob Hasegawa
John Potter
Bob Hasegawa for State Representative
PO Box 84331
Seattle, WA 98124-5631
Telephone: (206) 322-4804
Email: info@bobhasegawa.com
Website: www.bobhasegawa.com
Family: Single, Two Daughters
Significant Career Experience: Teamsters Local 174, SecretaryTreasurer (9 yrs); Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance, AFL-CIO
National Executive Board; U of W Harry Bridges Center for Labor
Studies, Board; Teamster Construction Health & Welfare Trustee;
International Teamsters Human Rights Commissioner; King County
Labor Council Board; JACL Board
Candidate Statement
Bob is a lifelong resident of our district and knows our issues. He
is a tireless advocate for working families and a proven leader of
the Teamsters Union winning top wages, healthcare and retirement
benefits in the country.
In our community, Bob’s also a longtime social justice activist
fighting for civil rights, equity of opportunity, and protecting our
environment.
As a father, Bob knows the importance of strong schools, safe and
healthy communities, family wage jobs, and just good old-fashioned
fairness in our system.
Let’s keep Bob Hasegawa in Olympia -- a voice for working
families.
Friends for John Potter
11842 14th Avenue SW
Seattle, WA 98168
Telephone: (206) 439-8072
Email: John@JohnPotter.us
Website: www.JohnPotter.us
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Heavy Construction Equipment
Operating Engineer, IUOE612
Education: Antioch University, BA, AOC: Labor Relations,
Organizational and Social Change; Shoreline CC, AA Labor
Studies; Seattle Central CC, Information Technology; Cleveland
High, Seattle
Elected Experience: State Representative, two terms; Committees:
Finance, Vice Chair; Capital Budget; Higher Education; Joint
Administrative Rules Review Committee, Chair; Lt. Governor’s
Committee on Economic Development and International
Relations
(Prefers Democratic Party)
71 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Legislative District 34
State Senator (Partisan Office, 2-year unexpired term)
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: State Senator, 2007-present
Education: Master of Public Administration from the University
of Washington; Bachelor of Arts in History and Political Science
from Gonzaga University
Elected Experience: Served in the State House of Representatives, 2001-2007
Family: Partner: Michael Culpepper
Significant Career Experience: Senior Budget Analyst, Seattle
Public Schools, 1998-2002; Assistant Grant Administrator, Pierce
County Prosecuting Attorney’s Office, 1992-1998
Candidate Statement
As your State Representative for the past 7 years, Joe McDermott
advocated strongly for issues important to us. Appointed to the State
Senate last October, McDermott continues his solid record of accomplishment. Joe served as the House Majority Caucus Education
Policy Leader and led efforts to provide alternatives to the WASL,
increase the accountability of the State Board of Education, and
increase the availability of school meals.
Joe fought for the bill adding sexual orientation to Washington’s
anti-discrimination statutes that passed in 2006 and since then has
been key in passage of Domestic Partnership legislation the last
two sessions.
Earlier this year, his first session in the Senate, he introduced
legislation to protect the Maury Island Aquatic Reserve, which he
has supported since it was first created in late 2000. This session
also brought the passage of legislation to allow local jurisdictions
to establish public campaign funding, which McDermott championed for years.
Outside of the Legislature, Joe serves on the Boards of Southwest
Youth & Family Services and the West Seattle Helpline. He is a
third generation resident of West Seattle where he lives with his
partner. Please vote to keep Joe working for our community!
Joe McDermott
Friends for Joe McDermott
PO Box 16254
Seattle, WA 98116
Telephone: (206) 937-4184
Email: Joe@JoeMcDermott.org
Website: www.JoeMcDermott.org 
72 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Legislative District 34
State Representative Position 1 (Partisan Office, 2-year term)
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Registered Nurse Clinician,
Group Health Cooperative
Education: Bachelor of Science in Nursing, Creighton
University
Family: Married to Tom Mitchell
Significant Career Experience: Registered Nurse for 32 years.
Elected to the State House of Representatives, 1994-2008
Candidate Statement
As chair of the house health care committee Eileen is leading the
fight to provide access to health care for all Washingtonians. She
has worked with other legislators to improve our public health,
mental health and long term care systems. Eileen continues to
focus on lowering the cost of health care while not decreasing the
quality of care delivered, especially for small businesses. Eileen
has worked to ensure that Washington State is a leader in health
care purchasing strategies, so that our tax dollars are spent wisely.
Eileen remains dedicated to improving access and affordability to
health care for all.
Sharon K. Nelson
Eileen L. Cody
Friends of Sharon Nelson
7318 SW 258th Place
Vashon, WA 98070
Telephone: (206) 463-5296
Email: sharonknelson49@yahoo.com
Website: www.sharonnelson.org
our state government. I will fight to protect our quality of life
through improving transit, enhancing public safety and protect the
environment.
Family: Married to John R. Nelson, two daughters
Significant Career Experience: Founder, Preserve Our Islands
(Maury/Vashon Island Residents fighting to stop the Glacier strip
mine).
Candidate Statement
As your State Representative, Sharon Nelson is leading the battle
to protect our quality of life. During her first session in Olympia,
she passed legislation to provide local governments with tools
to address climate change. Serving on the Agriculture & Natural
Resources Committee, she worked to bring locally grown food to
our school lunch programs.
Sharon has an extensive public policy background, having
worked for the King County Council for more than six years. First
as a volunteer and then as your State Representative, Nelson has
fought to block construction of an industrial barging facility on
Maury Island’s sensitive shoreline.
Committee to Elect Eileen Cody
5209 36th Avenue SW
Seattle, WA 98126
Telephone: (206) 935-9176
Email: eileenlcody@comcast.net
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: State Representative, 34th
District, Position 2; Chief of Staff to King County Councilmember
Dow Constantine
Education: BA in Psychology, Whitman College
Elected Experience: Appointed to State House of Representatives,
November 2007. As your Representative, I will work to reduce
class sizes and improve our schools. Making sure that every
child receives a quality education is the paramount duty of
(Prefers Democratic Party)
State Representative Position 2 (Partisan Office, 2-year short & full term)
73 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Legislative District 37
State Representative Position 1 (Partisan Office, 2-year term)
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Candidate Statement
As your 37th District State Representative, I am committed to
improving our economic security, our health, and the education
of our children. I led efforts to enhance job and market
opportunities for underserved communities and small businesses
in the emerging “green” economy. I fought to preserve long-term
healthcare options for elders in the neighborhoods they helped
build. I championed student-focused learning, meaningful family
involvement in schools, and adequate state funding for public
education so that every child achieves academic success. I am
proud to serve the people of our community and I appreciate your
support in this election.
Sharon Tomiko Santos
Friends of Santos
PO Box 78606
Seattle, WA 98178
Telephone: (206) 326-9042
Email: friendsofsts@aol.com
 
74 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Legislative District 37
State Representative Position 2 (Partisan Office, 2-year term)
(Prefers Libertarian Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: • Community activist and
volunteer lobbyist, • Successful small business owner
Education: Graduate of WSU in Anthropology
Elected Experience: Precinct Committee Officer
Family: Just celebrated 10 years with Life Partner, Dee Elliott, a
hospice nurse with Group Health
Significant Career Experience: • President, People’s Memorial
Association and People’s Memorial Funeral Cooperative, • CoChair, SEAMEC, • National Board Member, Funeral Consumer
Alliance, • Volunteer, Columbia City Cinema, • Usher Team Leader
and Steward, Center for Spiritual Living, • Legislation/Litigation
Committee Chair, LPWA, • Policy Sub-Committee, Compassion
& Choices, • Verbena, • LGBT Community Center, • Women’s
Funding Alliance, • Pierce County Blue Ribbon Review Panel on
Ranked Choice Voting (RCV), • Wrote legislation to implement
RCV
Candidate Statement
Elect me to your Legislature so I can work from the inside to fight
for more choices for the “little guys” who otherwise won’t have
a voice.
As President of People’s Memorial Association (www.
peoplesmemorial.org), a nonprofit funeral consumer cooperative,
I lobby legislators and regulators to protect families from unethical
practices and I work to increase choices by providing affordable,
dignified cremation and burial services.
I also work to increase voters’ choices. “Ranked Choice Voting”
(www.fairvote.org/rcv/) eliminates the Pick-a-Party primary, ends
“spoiler” concerns and saves taxpayers the cost of a primary. That’s
a win-win solution!
Eric Pettigrew
Ruth E. Bennett
Friends To Elect Eric Pettigrew
PO Box 28660
Seattle, WA 98118
Telephone: (206) 979-5999
Email: e.pettigrew@comcast.net
Significant Career Experience: Public Policy Specialist, The
Children’s Alliance; Deputy Chief of Staff for Public Safety, Mayor
Norman Rice; Director of Emergency Management, City of Seattle;
Executive Director Minority Youth Health Project, University of
Washington.
Candidate Statement
Eric Pettigrew brings people together to get results
As your Legislator:
Sponsored legislation promoting the purchase of fresh produce
from local farms to Washington State schools, farmers markets
and food banks.
Successfully primed budget request to help grandparents raising
their grandchildren, fund capital building projects including the
Wing Luke and African American museum and parks for children
with developmental disabilities.
Will continue to create more supports and incentives for dense
housing development in urban areas.
Led the passage of legislation that improved wages for child care
workers.
And many more initiatives to improve life in the 37th.
Bennett for State Rep
3703 S Edmunds #23
Seattle, WA 98118
Telephone: (206) 295-1590
Email: BennettforStateRep@comcast.net
Website: www.BennettforStateRep.com
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Director of External Relations/
Safeco Insurance
Education: B.S. Sociology, Oregon State University; M.S.W.
Community Organizing, University of Washington
Elected Experience: Elected Washington House of Representatives November 2002-Present; Served on the Early Learning and
Children’s Services Committee; Vice Chair of the Community
Economic and Trade Committee; Served on the Appropriations
Committee.
Family: Married to Jada Berteaux-Pettigrew, Son Justin 20 years
old, Daughter Linda 8 years old
(Prefers Democratic Party) 
75 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Legislative District 43
State Representative Position 1 (Partisan Office, 2-year term)
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Business and civil rights lawyer,
K&L Gates, Seattle
Education: Puyallup High School (1986), Yale College (1990)
and Yale Law School (1994).
Elected Experience: State Representative, 43rd District
(2006-present).
Family: Jamie and his partner Eric Pedersen, a former high school
English teacher and assistant principal, live on Capitol Hill with
their son, Trygve.
Significant Career Experience: Provides free legal assistance to
local nonprofits including Pride Foundation, Community Lunch on
Capitol Hill, Seattle Men’s Chorus, and Puyallup River Watershed
Council. Has successfully represented refugees seeking political
asylum in the United States. Lead volunteer attorney for Lambda
Legal in Washington marriage equality case.
Candidate Statement
“Hard working, remarkably able and dedicated, Jamie Pedersen
is an emerging progressive leader in the House.” –Speaker Frank
Chopp
Jamie led successful House efforts granting domestic partners
hundreds of rights and providing housing for youth leaving foster
care. He worked with other Democrats to allow school levies to
pass with 50% instead of 60%, clean up Puget Sound, and provide
health care to all Washington children.
Keep Jamie working for us. Vote Jamie Pedersen November 4!
Democratic Party nominee. Endorsements: NARAL Pro-Choice
Washington, Washington Conservation Voters, Washington
Federation of State Employees, Teamsters Local 117, Washington
Education Association.
Jamie Pedersen
People for Pedersen
815 First Avenue #111
Seattle, WA 98104
Telephone: (206) 370-7987
Email: jamie@peopleforpedersen.org
Website: www.peopleforpedersen.org 
76 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Legislative District 43
State Representative Position 2 (Partisan Office, 2-year term)
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Senior Advisor at Solid Ground,
a non-profit agency formerly known as Fremont Public Association, which provides social services to thousands of low-income
people.
Education: BA Degree, University of Washington. National
Merit Finalist, East High School in Bremerton.
Elected Experience: State Representative from 1995 to now.
Speaker of the Washington State House of Representatives from
1999 to now (including three years as Co-Speaker).
Family: Married to Nancy Long for 24 years, with son Nate and
daughter Ellie.
Significant Career Experience: Over 30 years of community
service, including as Executive Director of the Fremont Public
Association for many years. Numerous awards for public and
community service.
Candidate Statement
As the Democratic nominee for this position, I ask for your vote.
As Speaker of the Washington State House of Representatives,
I believe in Working Together for One Washington. I built a
constructive majority that enacted a progressive agenda focused
on education, health care, and jobs.
For example, education is more successful if our kids are healthy
and ready to learn. Therefore, I passed legislation to make sure all
children in our state have health care by 2010.
For the environment, I helped enact legislation that banned
toxic toys and doubled the Washington Wildlife and Recreation
Program to $100 million.
Kim Verde
Frank Chopp
Friends of Kim Verde
1425 Broadway #37
Seattle, WA 98122
Email: voteforverde@gmail.com
Website: www.voteforverde.com
Family: Widow, 1 daughter and son-in-law, 4 grandsons, 1
granddaughter, 2 great-grandchildren
Significant Career Experience: National Federation of
Republican Women, Teacher, World Champion Ski Racer (age
55-59)
Candidate Statement
Those currently representing us in Olympia have been there too
long and have become lethargic in their duties and beholden only
to special interests. I want to bring much needed change to our
government. Our officials are wasting our time and money on
frivolous things while ignoring key functions like repairing the
viaduct.
Government was created to serve the people, not the other way around.
Elect me and I will fight to bring back the priorities of government, the
things we NEED: better transportation infrastructure, better schools
and safer neighborhoods. Please visit my website for more information.
Friends of Frank Chopp
1000 Aurora Avenue N #100
Seattle, WA 98109
Telephone: (206) 381-1220
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Retired
Education: BA Education – Western Washington University; MA
Education (Curriculum and Instruction) – Boise State University;
Teaching credentials current K-12 (Endorsements: P.E. K-12,
Communications, Gifted and Talented Education)
Elected Experience: PCO (2 terms); Political activist; Capitol
Regent, Regent, NFRW; Campaign Committee, WFRW,
Eisenhower Literacy Committee, NFRW
(Prefers G O P Party) 
77
Judicial Offices
Here’s What You Should Know
What judicial candidates can say
Two types of information are shown for each judicial candidate listed in this pamphlet:
1. A brief biography, supplied by the candidate, which includes the candidate’s
background and professional experience.
2. A brief, unedited statement, written by the candidate, about why you should vote
for that individual.
Candidates’ statements are governed by Canon 7 of Washington’s Code of Judicial
Conduct. The Code bars judicial candidates from making statements that appear to
commit them on legal issues likely to come before them in court. The Canon also
specifies that a candidate may not make misleading or untruthful statements.
How we select judges in Washington State
Nonpartisan Election: Originally, judges in Washington State were elected in partisan
elections. This was changed in 1912 and since that time judges have been selected by
nonpartisan election.
Appointment: When a justice of the Washington State Supreme Court or a judge of the
state Court of Appeals or a superior court resigns or dies during a term of office, the
Governor appoints a new judge to fill that position. The appointed judge must run in
the next election.
All judges who complete their terms and wish to serve another must stand for a
nonpartisan election.
The importance of primary elections
Candidates for the Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, and Superior Courts who are
unopposed or who receive more than half of the votes in a primary election are thereby
elected to the position. But if there are three or more candidates, and no one wins
more than half the votes cast, the two with the most votes must face each other in the
November general election.
Supreme Court (The successful candidate may be determined in the primary): The
state’s “court of last resort,” the Supreme Court hears appeals from the Court of
Appeals and other lower courts. Through its rule-making authority, it also administers
the state court system.
Three of the court’s nine justices come up for election every two years. Justices serve
six-year staggered terms.
Court of Appeals (The successful candidate may be determined in the primary):
The Court of Appeals hears most of the appeals that come up from the county-level
superior courts. A total of 22 judges serve the court in three, multi-county divisions
headquartered in Seattle, Tacoma and Spokane. Candidates run in one of three county
groupings, or districts, within each division. Only voters registered within their
districts can vote for them. Judges serve staggered, six-year terms.
Superior Court (The successful candidate may be determined in the primary): Superior
courts are the state’s courts of general jurisdiction. They hear felony criminal cases,
civil matters, dissolutions (divorces), juvenile cases, and appeals from courts of limited
jurisdiction. They are organized by county into 32 judicial districts. Candidates run in
the county or counties within their district, and only voters within that district can cast
ballots for them. Judges serve four-year terms.
78 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Supreme Court Justice
Position 3 (Nonpartisan Office, 6-year term)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Supreme Court Justice
Education: Law degree with high honors in 1984; BA with honors
in Political Science in 1979, both from Gonzaga University.
Legal/Judicial Experience: Supreme Court Justice, 6 years;
Washington Attorney General’s Office, 16 years, specializing in
revenue, transportation, criminal justice and personnel; Supreme
Court judicial clerk, 2 years. Admitted to the Washington State Bar
Association in 1984.
Family: Oldest of 7, Aunt of 13, Godmother of many.
Significant Career Experience: Judicial Information System
Committee, Chair; Board for Judicial Administration Public
Trust and Confidence Committee, Chair; Council on Public
Legal Education, member; Washington State Bar Association,
President and Board of Governors; Washington Women Lawyers,
President.
Candidate Statement
Since you elected me to our Supreme Court six years ago, I have
worked to improve our justice system, to make our courts efficient
and responsive, to ensure access to justice for all, and to protect
the rights of every person in Washington State.
I was raised in a loving family which placed great value on fairness,
service and the dignity of every man, woman and child.
Every day I go to work aware that my decisions affect thousands
of lives. Since joining the court I have decided over 600 cases. To
every case I have brought an open mind, fairness, common sense
and a commitment to uphold our Constitution.
We are a diverse people united by a common law and Constitution.
As a Justice, I am obligated not to any group, but to respect the
rule of law and uphold our Constitution. I am dedicated to ensuring
that we have a legal system that treats people fairly, equally and
protects the rights of everyone.
Endorsed by Washington State Troopers Association, Washington
State Council of Firefighters, Washington Federation of Teachers,
Washington State Labor Council, Washington Conservation Voters,
Women’s Political Caucus, Justices, Judges, attorneys, community
leaders, and people throughout Washington.
Mary Fairhurst
Re-Elect Justice Mary Fairhurst
6963 Littlerock Road SW
Tumwater, WA 98512
Telephone: (206) 898-9841
Email: info@justicemaryfairhurst.com
Website: www.JusticeMaryFairhurst.com
Position 4 (Nonpartisan Office, 6-year term)
Charles W. Johnson
Committee to Re-elect Justice Johnson
1110 Capitol Way Ste 225
Olympia, WA 98501
Telephone: (253) 572-4500
Email: Johnsonj08@comcast.net
Website: www.justicecharlesjohnson.com
Candidate Statement
Justice Charles Johnson has proven he understands and protects
our rights and freedoms. For 18 years, his record shows his
commitment to protecting privacy rights and holding government
accountable, coupled with his courage and ability to decide the
difficult issues the Court faces.
Evaluated by lawyers groups, Justice Johnson rates “exceptionally
well qualified.” His fairness, intellect, common sense and
impartiality are reflected by groups supporting his re-election,
including: Washington State Labor Council, Association of
Washington Business, Joint Council of Firefighters, American
Federation of Teachers, Washington Conservation Voters,
Washington State Young Democrats, Mainstream Republicans
of Washington, Joint Council of Teamsters, and Rental Housing
Association of Puget Sound.
The American Bar Association Council on Racial and Ethnic
Fairness has recognized Justice Johnson’s efforts to improve
justice for all persons.
We need Supreme Court Justices like Justice Charles Johnson,
with proven experience, intelligence, integrity, fairness and
impartiality. Hard work and difficult challenges underscore his
entire life. He worked as a laborer to pay for his education and
understands the value of our time and money.
A lifetime Washington resident, Justice Johnson and his wife,
Dana, live in Gig Harbor.
For more information please visit www.justicecharlesjohnson.com .
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Associate Chief Justice,
Washington State Supreme Court
Education: Seattle University School of Law, J.D. 1976,
University of Washington, B.A. 1974, Curtis High School,
Tacoma.
Legal/Judicial Experience: Justice Charles Johnson, the most
senior member of the Washington State Supreme Court, has spent
18 years protecting individual rights, balancing the scales of
justice for those less privileged, and improving court efficiency.
For 12 years he has taught the Washington State Constitution
at Seattle University School of Law. Before joining the State
Supreme Court, Justice Johnson worked 14 years as a lawyer
helping people with every-day needs.
79 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Supreme Court Justice
Position 7 (Nonpartisan Office, 6-year short & full term)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Justice, Washington Supreme
Court
Education: B.A. and J.D., Gonzaga University; West Valley High,
Spokane.
Legal/Judicial Experience: Extensive trial and appellate practice
on both sides of Washington, including 120+ appearances before
the Washington Supreme Court. Author and speaker at 100+ legal
seminars. Appointed, then elected to Division Three of the Court
of Appeals before joining the Supreme Court.
Family: Married 19 years to Craig Stephens; two children.
Significant Career Experience: Adjunct Professor at Gonzaga
Law School since 1995, teaching state and federal Constitutional
Law, Community Property and Appellate Advocacy. School board
director from 1996-2007. Former community college instructor and
Assistant Dean of Admissions at Gonzaga.
Candidate Statement
The first woman from Eastern Washington to serve on the State
Supreme Court, Justice Debra Stephens brings unique experience
as an attorney, constitutional law scholar, and Appeals Court judge
to the bench. Rated “Exceptionally Well Qualified” by five separate
Bar Associations, she is committed to protecting the rights and
liberties of all Washingtonians.
Justice Stephens raised her family in Spokane while maintaining
a law practice specializing in serving victims of crimes and their
families.
On the Supreme Court, Justice Stephens is committed to upholding
and respecting our laws and constitution free from bias, with a firm
commitment to our shared values. Justice Stephens believes firmly
that the law should be grounded in common sense, and address the
needs of real people.
Active in her church and community, former chair of her local
school board and a volunteer mentor to young women, Justice
Debra Stephens brings real-world perspective and outstanding
legal qualifications to the Supreme Court.
Endorsers include former Justices Richard Guy and Faith Ireland,
dozens more former and current judges; Washington State Patrol
Troopers, State Labor Council, State Council of Firefighters,
business leaders, teachers, Conservation Voters, legal peers,
community leaders, and both Republicans and Democrats
throughout Washington.
Debra L. Stephens
Citizens to Retain Justice Debra Stephens
PO Box 2734
Seattle, WA 98111
Telephone: (206) 898-9841
Email: info@JusticeDebraStephens.com
Website: www.JusticeDebraStephens.com 
80 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
Court of Appeals, Division 1, District 1
The following candidate did not submit a statement for publication:
Ann Schindler
Candidate Statement
The Washington State Court of Appeals decides most cases on
appeal from the trial courts, including appeals in civil, criminal,
juvenile, and family law matters. A panel of three judges decides
several hundred cases a year and each judge authors opinions in
approximately 70 cases. Judge Ann Schindler has the experience
and leadership qualities we need on the Court of Appeals.
Judge Schindler has received the Outstanding Judge of the Year
award from the King County Bar Association and the Vanguard
and the President’s award from Washington Women Lawyers.
Please vote to re-elect Judge Ann Schindler to the Court of
Appeals. Thank you.
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Judge Schindler has served
with distinction on the Court of Appeals since 2002 and currently
serves as the Chief Judge for Division I.
Legal/Judicial Experience: Judge Schindler was a trial judge in
King County Superior Court for 10 years. She was named the first
Chief Judge of the Regional Justice Center and the Chief Asbestos
Judge. Prior to being a judge, she was a senior attorney in the
Prosecutor’s Office and was in private practice with the law firm
of Culp, Dwyer, Guterson and Grader.
Court of Appeals, Division 1, District 1
Judge Position 6 (Nonpartisan Office, 6-year term)
Judge Position 5
(Nonpartisan Office, 6-year short & full term)
Linda Lau
Judge Position 5
(Nonpartisan Office, 6-year short & full term)
Linda Lau
81 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
King Superior Court
Judge Position 1 (Nonpartisan Office, 4-year term)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Senior Deputy Prosecuting
Attorney – King County.
Education: JD, Seattle University, 1988; BA, University of Puget
Sound, 1984.
Legal/Judicial Experience: Twenty years courtroom experience
– hundreds of Civil and Criminal cases. Bradshaw tried complex
trials: sexual assault, animal abuse, and high-profile murders
including convictions of Paul Keller, the murderer of Mia Zapata,
the deaths of four Seattle Firefighters, and “Seattle Shipyard
Shooting.”
Family: Bradshaw grew up in South King County. Tim lives with
his wife and young son in Seattle.
Significant Career Experience: Lead prosecutor on groundbreaking, CSI cases, including the first DNA case in County history; Founding member, Homicide Unit; Recipient, Norm Maleng
Outstanding Trial Advocacy Award.
Candidate Statement
The King County Bar rates Tim Bradshaw “Exceptionally Well
Qualified,” its highest rating and the highest rating in this race.
The Washington Women Lawyers Bar also awards Bradshaw the
highest rating in this race.
Bradshaw, winner of the August Primary, offers proven courtroom
experience, and lifelong public service. For two decades, Bradshaw
has served our community representing victims in court to bring
murderers, batterers, and sexually violent predators to justice.
Bradshaw is the only candidate to have tried both Civil and
Criminal trials. Unmatched experience, and involvement with the
YWCA’s “Girls First,” prepares Bradshaw to manage a courtroom
that respects jurors and ensures equal access for all.
Known for fairness, knowledge of the law, and integrity, Bradshaw
is the only candidate earning three “Exceptionally Well Qualified”
ratings (Latina/o, and GLBT Bar Associations) and endorsed
by both the Democratic and Republican Central Committees.
Bradshaw received the Municipal League’s highest rating issued
in this race.
Bradshaw is endorsed by Incumbent Judge Charles Mertel,
Governor Gary Locke, U.S. Attorney (fmr) Mike McKay,
Executive Ron Sims, Supreme Court Justice Bobbe Bridge, Judy
Maleng, WSBA President (fmr) Ronald Ward, Teamsters 18,
Seattle and King County Police Guilds, Local 17 IFPTE, Ruth
Woo, and 30 Judges.
Tim Bradshaw
The Committee To Elect Tim Bradshaw
PO Box 12922
Seattle, WA 98111
Telephone: (206) 902-8120
Email: BradshawforJudge@gmail.com
Website: www.BradshawforJudge.org
Suzanne (Sue) Parisien
Committee to Elect Sue Parisien for
Superior Court
PO Box 685
Mercer Island, WA 98040
Telephone: (206) 261-0928
Email: info@sueforjudge.com
Website: www.sueforjudge.com
Candidate Statement
“Her trial results were outstanding, and her…clients have consistently expressed their confidence in her and the high quality of her
work.” –Governor Chris Gregoire
“Suzanne’s passion for the law and her compassion for public service … make her, in my mind, a fine candidate for …the Superior
Court.” –Attorney General Rob McKenna
Assistant Attorney General Sue Parisien has two decades of civil
trial experience - vital in Superior Court where civil cases outnumber criminal nearly 4 to 1. Through her public and private
practice Sue has represented individuals, small businesses, and
the State of Washington. No other candidate brings this breadth
of experience.
An award-winning advocate for the vulnerable, Sue provides free
legal representation to victims of domestic violence and worked
to ensure needy citizens have equal access to justice. A breast
cancer survivor, Sue works with non-profits dedicated to early
detection.
Broad bipartisan endorsements:
Community Leaders: Governors Gregoire and Gardner, Attorney
General McKenna, Bellevue Mayor Degginger, Jenny Durkan and
many other elected officials.
Organizations: Washington Conservation Voters, Women’s Political
Caucus, IAM 751 Boeing Machinists, King County Realtors Assn.,
Renton Police Officers Guild, King County Corrections Guild.
Rated: “Exceptionally Well Qualified”; “Well Qualified” and “Very
Good” by Municipal League.
.
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Assistant Attorney General
Education: Seattle University; Villanova Law School
Legal/Judicial Experience: Two decades of civil litigation experience in the private and public sector and in-house as the Director
of General Liability for Nordstrom. Arbitrator on over 75 cases and
mediated hundreds of cases in civil rights, employment discrimination, wrongful death, medical malpractice, breach of contract and
negligence.
Family: Married, two daughters
Significant Career Experience: Represented employees and Washington State in Superior, Federal, and Appellate Courtrooms in 18
counties. Volunteered thousands of hours on behalf of the indigent;
as a guardian ad litem for children in foster care; protecting victims
of domestic violence; and at the Ronald McDonald House. 
82 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
King Superior Court
Judge Position 22 (Nonpartisan Office, 4-year term)
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Judge Pro Tempore; Adjunct
Faculty UW Law School; Trial Advocacy Teacher.
Education: JD, Northwestern University Law School
Legal/Judicial Experience: Lawyer 34 years, public and private
practice. UW Certified Mediator. Faculty, National Institute for
Trial Advocacy.
Family: Married, two daughters.
Significant Career Experience: Litigated criminal cases from
shoplifting to capital murder. Prosecuted civil rights cases for U.S.
government representing victims of age, sex and race discrimination. Private practice representing union members, corporations
and working people. 24 years teaching lawyers and law students
to represent clients in court. Worked with Seattle Police to improve
community relations. Trained lawyers representing victims of
domestic violence. Founded company to protect schoolchildren
from Internet pornography.
Candidate Statement
Holly Hill is the more experienced candidate for judge. Holly
has represented people from all walks of life, owned a company
and taught hundreds how to be better lawyers. She has advocated
for women, families and foster children through the Northwest
Women’s Law Center, YMCA and Treehouse. Holly will judge
with compassion, fairness and firmness.
Ratings: “Outstanding” Municipal League, “Exceptionally” or “Well”
Qualified all rating Bar Associations, “A” Women in Unity, “Exceptionally Well Qualified” King County Correctional Officers Guild.
BIPARTISAN endorsements for Holly Hill:
Organizations: Washington Conservation Voters, King County
Democrats Organization & 11 Democratic Legislative Districts,
King County Labor Council, Aerospace Machinists & other unions,
Women’s Political Caucus, Seattle-King County Association of
Realtors.
Over 35 judges including: Judge Douglas McBroom (Position 22,
retiring) and Supreme Court Justices Mary Fairhurst, Phil Talmadge
and Rosselle Pekelis.
Elected & community leaders including: Governors John Spellman,
Gary Locke & Booth Gardner; King County Executive, Ron Sims;
U.S. Attorneys John & Mike McKay, Kate Pflaumer; Congressman Adam Smith, Norm Rice, Larry Gossett, Larry Phillips, Nan
Campbell, Julia Patterson, Tim Burgess, Bruce Harrell, Jean Godden, Tomio Moriguchi, Eric Pettigrew, Claudia Kauffman, Bob
Hasegawa, Ruth Kagi, Velma Veloria, Kip Tokuda, Ruth Woo.
Holly Hill
Holly Hill for Judge
520 Pike Street Ste 1200
Seattle, WA 98101
Telephone: (206) 420-2086
Email: info@hollyhillforjudge.org
Website: www.hollyhillforjudge.org
Julia Garratt
Committee to Elect Julia Garratt
PMB 309, 6947 Coal Creek Parkway SE
Newcastle, WA 98059
Telephone: (206) 353-9963
Email: julia.garratt@gmail.com
Website: www.garratt4judge.com
Significant Career Experience: Over 1000 days on King County
Superior Court bench; Indeterminate Sentence Review Board (Parole Board), recently appointed as Juvenile Court Commissioner
Candidate Statement
Julia Garratt is an exceptional candidate who has the experience
and leadership ability for King County Superior Court. Julia served
as a Superior Court Judge Pro Tem for 10 yearsruling in thousands
of cases in over 1000 days on the bench. Recently appointed as a
Court Commissioner by the Superior Court Judges, she is highly
rated by her peers and is respected for her fairness and understanding of the laws of King County and Washington State. Appointed to
the Indeterminate Sentence Review Board (Parole Board) in 1994,
she was reappointed by Governors Locke and Gregoire. She has
served both as a prosecutor and public defender and is the most
experienced candidate for Superior Court position 22.
Julia believes in equal access to the courts and equal justice
for everyone within the judicial system and is passionate about
maintaining the public trust. She has received “Exceptionally
Well-Qualified” and “Well-Qualified” ratings from the Asian Bar,
Washington Women Lawyers, King County Bar, Loren Miller Bar,
Latina/o Bar and QLaw Bar Associations. Recommended by The
Seattle Times, and rated “Outstanding” by the Municipal League,
Julia Garratt is experienced, qualified and respected and will be
“your voice” on the King County Superior Court.
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Juvenile Court Commissioner,
King County Superior Court
Education: BA - University of Washington (’75), Law Degree -
Gonzaga University (’79)
Legal/Judicial Experience: King County Superior Court Judge
pro tem - over 1000 days on the bench; Tukwila and Auburn Municipal Courts; Public Defender for the Associated Counsel for the
Accused; Deputy Prosecuting Attorney; Pro Bono representation
in Domestic Relations cases in Family Court.
Family: Married - 4 children (2 sons serving our country with
distinction in the Navy), King County resident since 1961 
83 Washington Administrative Code (WAC) 434-381-180. The secretary of state is not responsible for the content of arguments or statements.
The secretary may correct obvious errors in grammar, spelling or punctuation.
King Superior Court
Judge Position 37 (Nonpartisan Office, 4-year term)
Jean Rietschel
Committee to Elect Judge
Jean Rietschel
PO Box 19473
Seattle, WA 98109
Telephone: (206) 383-0766
Email: ElectJudgeJean@yahoo.com
Website: www.ElectJudgeJean.com
dependencies, appeals, and civil commitments. In her earlier private
practice, she handled criminal and family law.
Candidate Statement
From WTO cases to domestic violence, from criminal infractions
to land use disputes, Judge Jean has been a judge and leader on
Seattle Municipal Court bench.
Judge Jean Rietschel is endorsed by The Seattle Times, PostIntelligencer, and Stranger. The Post-Intelligencer said, “Rietschel
has a record for being fair but tough. She’s ready to step into the job
and is prepared to deal with the county’s budgetary challenges.”
She is the only judge in this race rated “Outstanding” by the
Municipal League. She received the top rating of local bar
associations: “Exceptionally Well Qualified.” Judge Jean Rietschel
has been top-rated by annual attorney evaluation polls throughout
her career. She is a trusted member of the bench, often asked to
speak on judicial values.
She took the lead in writing the Misdemeanor Report, saving
money and reducing the number of defendants who fail to show
up in court by offering smart alternatives. She established the
Domestic Violence Court, holding suspects more accountable. The
Alternatives to Confinement program was also her idea - promoting
lower-cost rehabilitation for non-violent offenders.
The words used most often to describe her include fair, considerate
of people’s time, hard-working and above politics in the adjudication
of justice.
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Seattle Municipal Court Judge
Education: University of Washington Law School
Legal/Judicial Experience: Appointed by former Mayor Norm
Rice, Judge Jean Rietschel has adjudicated over 1,000 cases in her
12 years on Seattle’s Municipal Court. She has served as Presiding
Judge and on its Executive Committee. She chaired the Judicial
Ethics Advisory Committee, Trial Court Coordinating Committee,
King County Regional Law and Justice Committee, and Regional
Relicensing Summit. She is a Board member of Seattle Counseling
Service.
Significant Career Experience: Judge Rietschel was formerly
a Public Defender, handling felonies, misdemeanors, juveniles,
Biographical Information
Current Occupation/Employer: Senior Deputy Prosecuting
Attorney for King County
Education: Graduate of University of Washington Law School,
1986. B.A. Boston University
Legal/Judicial Experience: 22 years prosecuting all kinds of
crimes, including sex crimes, domestic violence, murder; more than
10 years in the Fraud Division litigating complex civil forfeitures,
complex economic and other crimes; lead prosecutor in Drug
Diversion Court.
Family: Mother of a teenager who has attended Seattle Public
Schools.
Significant Career Experience: Deputy Under Secretary, U.S.
Department of Interior, Carter Administration. Co-founded national
Environmental Policy Center, 1972. Teaching: seminars at J.F.K.
Institute of Politics, Harvard; classes on law and ethics for lawyers
and police.
Candidate Statement
Rated “well qualified” by the King County Bar and “very good” by
the Municipal League, Senior Deputy Prosecutor Barbara Mack is
a tireless advocate for justice and dedicated public servant. She has
prosecuted nearly every type of crime, compassionately advocating
for victims and achieving fair sentences. She has the real world
experience and common sense we need in our Superior Court.
As lead prosecutor in Drug Diversion Court, Barbara works to
reduce crime and its costs to taxpayers, and helps offenders become
contributing members of society. She has a reputation in the courts
for hard work, strong intellect, fairness, and good humor.
Prior to her courtroom work, Barbara co-founded a national
environmental organization and served as Deputy Under Secretary
of the U.S. Department of Interior.
A deeply involved community volunteer, she chairs the Board of
Directors of Children’s Trust Foundation.
Barbara says: “I will honor your vote by being a fair and ethical
judge. I promise to improve our justice system, protect our
communities, and ensure equal access to justice.”
Endorsements: King County Democratic Party, King County
Republican Party, Seattle Police Officers Guild, Washington
Conservation Voters, and dozens of State Senators, Representatives,
judges, and citizens throughout King County. For more, see www.
MackforSuperiorCourt.com .
Barbara Mack
People for Barbara Mack
PO Box 2603
Seattle, WA 98111
Telephone: (206) 450-2296
Email: mail@MackForSuperiorCourt.com
Website: www.MackforSuperiorCourt.com 
84 King County Elections is not authorized to edit statements, nor is it responsible for the contents therein.
The complete text of this proposition is printed in this pamphlet and online at www.kingcounty.gov/elections .
King County Charter Amendment No. 1
Elected Elections Director
Shall the King County Charter be amended to provide that
the position of county director of elections be created as a
nonpartisan elected office?
Statement for Statement against
If this proposed charter amendment is approved, the elections division would become
an executive department and would be administered by an elected, nonpartisan director.
The initial election for the county director of elections would occur at a special election
on February 3, 2009, and the initial term of office would end on December 31, 2011.
Subsequent elections for the office of county director of elections would occur at the
2011 primary and general elections and every four years thereafter.
Last November, 56.99% of King County voters said YES to present
this issue before you this November.
Charter Amendment No. 1 will ensure that our next director of elections
is elected, not appointed.
We urge you to vote YES to bring accountability and restore trust to
the King County elections department.
Vote YES and join both bi-partisan committees that studied the 2004
election and advocated that an elected director of elections would help
achieve needed reform.
Vote YES and join the hundreds of thousands of your fellow citizens
that signed the petitions and voted to allow you this opportunity to
change King County’s charter.
Vote YES!
Every county in our state has an elected Auditor except King County.
This person is directly accountable to the voters, and can advocate
for resources, improvements in election laws, and other innovations
without having to go through many layers of bureaucracy as is the
current situation in King County.
An outstanding candidate will hire seasoned, professional supervisors
and election personnel, and create a culture of professionalism, honesty and transparency that will restore voters’ trust in this important
function of government – counting our votes.
Join Democrats, Republicans, and Independents and Vote YES!
King County Charter Amendment No. 1
Official Ballot Title Explanatory Statement
Our recent problem elections have been conducted by “qualified
professionals” appointed by the Executive and Council. It’s time we
had elections conducted by professional staff directly supervised by
an elected official who is answerable solely to the people of King
County, as is the case with every other county in Washington. The
Executive’s own Elections Task Force and the Council’s own Citizens
Elections Oversight Committee both strongly recommended this
critical reform. Vote YES!
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Toby Nixon, Reagan Dunn,
Jane Hague
Rebuttal of statement against Rebuttal of statement for
Our League of Women Voters of King County Committee urges
you to vote against adding an elected Elections Director to King
County government for the purpose of running our Elections
Department.
Our Home Rule Charter was approved in 1967 and modernized King
County with an executive and council with oversight, transparency
and accountability. With nearly 1 million voters, King County, like
Los Angeles and San Diego, has an appointed director to oversee
elections.
The League of Women Voters supports elections for policymakers.
Jobs requiring specific experience and professional skills should be
appointed.
The King County Elections Director needs to be a qualified
professional administrator with a full understanding of the
technical challenges facing the 21st century.
Currently our Elections Director is appointed by the County Executive
and confirmed by the County Council. The director is accountable
to the elected County Executive, and can be immediately replaced
for poor job performance. The Council regularly reviews the Elections Department performance, through their oversight and review of
the budget. We support an appointed Elections Director.
The Leagues of Women Voters in King County oppose changing the
Director of Elections from an appointed position to an elected position. We urge you to vote NO.
VOTE NO on Charter Amendment 1! Many reforms have been made
since 2004-5. We want an elections director who has the technical
and management skills to run elections in one of the largest counties
in the country. We support electing policy makers and appointing
experienced professionals for jobs that require technical skills. The
King County Elections Director must be immune from campaigning
and fundraising. Vote NO on Charter Amendment 1!
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Becky Cox, Denise D. Smith,
Virginia Gunby

YES
NO
85 King County Elections is not authorized to edit statements, nor is it responsible for the contents therein.
The complete text of this proposition is printed in this pamphlet and online at www.kingcounty.gov/elections .
Statement for Statement against
This proposed Charter Amendment adds persons with disabilities
and those with non-traditional sexual orientation or gender identity
and expression to the groups already protected from discrimination
in employment or compensation within King County government.
The proposal also prohibits the county from contracting with nongovernmental persons or agencies that do discriminate on the basis of
disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression.
The King County Charter Review Commission recommended this
amendment with a vote of 18 yes, 0 no, and 3 absent. The King
County Council voted 8 to 1 to place this amendment on the 2008
general election ballot.
Passage of this Charter Amendment is urged, to clearly and explicitly
protect persons with disabilities and non-traditional sexual orientation
from arbitrary and unfair discrimination. Passage will help round out a
multi-decade effort to create a level playing field for all Americans.
King County Charter Amendment No. 2
Official Ballot Title Explanatory Statement
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Doreen Cato, Dan Gandara,
Allan Munro
No Statement Submitted.
King County Charter Amendment No. 2
Prohibiting Discrimination
Shall Section 840 of the King County Charter be amended
to add disability, sexual orientation, and gender identity or
expression to the prohibited grounds for discrimination in
county employment and county contracting, and to limit
the prohibition against discrimination in county contracting
to contracts with nongovernmental entities, as provided in
Ordinance No. 16204?
Currently, King County Charter Section 840 prohibits discrimination on the basis of
sex, race, color, national origin, religious affiliation, or age (except by minimum age
or retirement) in county employment and county contracting. If this proposed charter
amendment is approved, disability, sexual orientation, and gender identity or expression
would be added to the prohibited grounds for discrimination in county employment
and county contracting and the prohibition against discrimination in county contracting
would be limited to contracts with nongovernmental entities.

YES
NO
86 King County Elections is not authorized to edit statements, nor is it responsible for the contents therein.
The complete text of this proposition is printed in this pamphlet and online at www.kingcounty.gov/elections .
Statement for Statement against
This proposal will improve the authority, efficiency and effectiveness
of the county’s three regional committees (Regional Policy, Transit,
and Water Quality). It has broad support from the Charter Review
Commission, all nine County Councilmembers, and a working group
of representatives from the Suburban Cities Association and local
sewer and water districts.
This proposal represents a negotiated compromise that balances the
needs and interests of many local governments and their representatives
involved with the regional committees.
The proposal would expand the role of non-County Councilmembers
who serve on the committees, because: the committees would be
allowed to introduce legislation to the Council without needing a
County Councilmember’s separate sponsorship; and each committee
could appoint its own vice-chair. Also, unlike now, the Regional Policy
Committee could develop its own work program without County
Council approval. Finally, the number of county councilmembers on
each committee would be reduced from 6 to 3, but their voting power
would be undiminished. This continues the balance currently provided
by the Charter and enables County Councilmembers to increase their
involvement with a growing number of multi-county issues.
Together, these changes would improve the functioning of the county’s
regional committees and enable them to perform more effectively.
King County Charter Amendment No. 3
Official Ballot Title Explanatory Statement
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Mike Lowry, Lois North
No Statement Submitted.
King County Charter Amendment No. 3
Regional Committees
Shall Sections 230.10, 270.20 and 270.30 of the King County
Charter be amended to reduce the number of county council
members on regional committees, establish a vice chair
position on regional committees, authorize the regional policy
committee to adopt its own work program, add authority for
regional committees to initiate legislation, modify regional
committee procedures, and authorize the addition of nonvoting
members to the water quality committee, as provided in
Ordinance No. 16205?
King County Charter Section 270 currently requires that three regional committees
be established by ordinance to develop, review, and recommend regional policies and
plans for consideration by the county council. There is one committee for transit, one
for water quality, and one for other regional policies and plans.
If this charter amendment is adopted, the number of county council members on regional
committees would be reduced from six to three. Each county council member’s vote
would be weighted as two votes to maintain the current proportion of the votes of
county council members to those of other committee members. Members representing
six and one-half votes would constitute a quorum of the committee. In the absence
of a quorum, committees could perform all committee functions except for voting on
legislation or a work program.
This charter amendment would also establish a vice chair position on each committee that
would be filled by appointment by a majority of committee members who are not county
council members. The amendments would also authorize the county council to appoint
to the water quality committee additional, nonvoting members who represent entities
outside of the county that receive sewerage treatment services from the county.
Additionally, the charter amendment would authorize regional committees to develop
their own work plans and to propose legislation for the county council’s consideration
and action, and would modify certain regional committee procedures.

YES
NO
87 King County Elections is not authorized to edit statements, nor is it responsible for the contents therein.
The complete text of this proposition is printed in this pamphlet and online at www.kingcounty.gov/elections .
Statement for Statement against
This proposed charter amendment would permit the King County
Council to adopt ordinances to establish qualifications for candidates
for the offices of assessor, elections director (if it becomes an elected
office) and sheriff. This proposal was recommended by a large majority
of the Charter Review Commission and a majority of the County
Council. There is precedent for this amendment because in 1996
the Charter was amended to allow the County Council to establish
additional qualifications for the sheriff’s office.
Approval of this proposal would enable the County Council to adopt
legislation that would prevent election of a candidate who lacks the
essential qualifications for the particular position. (Charter Review
Commissioners raised this concern during their deliberations).
Adoption of this proposal also would help to avoid conflicts of interests
that a potential officeholder might have.
Washington state law already establishes some minimal state
requirements for county prosecuting attorneys and sheriffs. Shouldn’t
King County be able to do the same for the persons who will assess
our properties and conduct our elections?
We urge you to support this proposal.
King County Charter Amendment No. 4
Official Ballot Title Explanatory Statement
The County Executive and Councilmembers are elected to establish
policies for county government. The Assessor, Sheriff, and the
Elections Director are administrative officers who carry out the policies
determined by the Executive and Councilmembers.
It makes sense to spell out specific qualifications for officials
administering special, technical jobs, such as the Assessor, Sheriff,
and Elections Director. Setting qualifications for these jobs will
protect the public interest, ensuring that the jobs are performed
competently.
Vote yes.
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Dan Gandara, Gary Long,
Lois North
Rebuttal of statement for Rebuttal of statement against
What are the qualifications to run for King County Council? Just be
21 years old and a registered voter living in your council district. No
college degree. No special training. Just let the voters decide.
The Council trusts the voters to make the right decision when it comes
to their office. So why don’t they trust the voters when it comes to
the election of other offices?
If the approval of the people of King County is qualification enough
to serve on the King County Council, then it should be good enough
to serve in other offices.
No other county in Washington has special qualifications for the
auditors who run their elections. There are no special qualifications
for Secretary of State, who is the chief elections officer for the entire
state.
What we do need are elected officials who are committed to obeying
the law, to transparency, and to serving the interests of the public. No
qualification set by the Council can measure such things – only the
voters can make that determination.
We should trust the people of King County to choose the best person
for director of elections and the other elected executive officers of
the county. Vote NO.
Just as no one would present him or herself as a candidate for sheriff
without some law enforcement background, any serious candidate
for assessor or elections director will have the required technical and
management ability. Voters will determine the best one for the job. The
County Council should not decide who is eligible for these separate
executive positions; we trust the voters of King County to make their
own selections. Vote No.
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Toby Nixon, Sarah Rindlaub
King County Charter Amendment No. 4
Additional Qualifications for Elected Officials
Shall Section 630 of the King County Charter be amended
to authorize the county council to establish additional
qualifications for separately elected officials who head
executive departments, as provided in Ordinance No.
16206?
Currently, King County Charter Section 630 requires that county elected officials be at
least twenty-one years of age, citizens of the United States, and residents and registered
voters of King County, and that council members be residents of the district they
represent. Section 630 allows the county council to establish additional qualifications
for the office of sheriff. If this proposed charter amendment is approved, it would
amend Section 630 to allow the county council to establish additional qualifications
for all separately elected officials who head executive departments. This would include
the offices of sheriff and assessor. Additionally, the director of elections would also be
included if the proposed charter amendment making it an elected office is approved
by voters at the November 2008 election.
YES
NO
88 King County Elections is not authorized to edit statements, nor is it responsible for the contents therein.
The complete text of this proposition is printed in this pamphlet and online at www.kingcounty.gov/elections .
Statement for Statement against
The management of King County’s $5.6 billion budget requires sound
financial analysis and an understanding of the effects of current and
future economic conditions on County finances. To make wise decisions
on the expenditure of public tax dollars, the County Executive and
the Council need reliable, accurate, and objective economic and
revenue forecasts.
This charter amendment would ensure that County decision makers
have access to the best forecasts available when balancing the annual
budget. The amendment establishes:
1) an Office of Economic and Financial Analysis led by a chief
economist and charged with producing official economic and revenue
forecasts for the County; and 2) a Forecast Council, with executive and
legislative branch representatives overseeing the Office and adopting
annual, official forecasts. These forecasts would be the basis for the
County’s budgeting process.
This proven model is used by Washington State and has produced
dependable forecasts for 24 years. The inter-branch, public nature of
the Forecast Council creates accountability, provides transparency,
and ensures objective financial analysis.
The King County Executive and all nine members of the County
Council support this proposal for ensuring reliable, accurate and
objective financial analysis in King County government. Please join
them in supporting this charter amendment.
King County Charter Amendment No. 5
Official Ballot Title Explanatory Statement
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Gary Locke, Lois North,
Lloyd Hara
No Statement Submitted.
King County Charter Amendment No. 5
Establishing Forecast Council and Office of Economic
and Financial Analysis
Shall the King County Charter be amended to require
the establishment of a forecast council and an office of
economic and financial analysis, as provided in Ordinance
No. 16207?
If this proposed charter amendment is approved, it would add a new section to the
King County Charter that directs the county council to establish a forecast council and
office of economic and financial analysis, and would modify other, related sections
of the Charter.
The forecast council would be composed of the county executive, two county council
members, and a county employee who has knowledge of the budgeting and financial
management practices of the county and who would be appointed to the forecast
council by the executive. The forecast council would unanimously appoint a chief
county economist who would administer the office of economic and financial analysis
and be responsible for the employment and supervision of the employees of the
office. The positions of the chief economist and the other employees of the office of
economic and financial analysis would not be career service positions. Neither the
forecast council nor the office of economic and financial analysis would be a part of
the executive branch.
Each year the chief county economist would be responsible for preparing proposed
preliminary and updated official economic and revenue forecasts for county government
that may be adopted or revised by the forecast council. The charter amendment would
require that the forecasts be the basis for the executive’s preliminary budget preparation,
proposed budget, and any budget amendments.

YES
NO
89 King County Elections is not authorized to edit statements, nor is it responsible for the contents therein.
The complete text of this proposition is printed in this pamphlet and online at www.kingcounty.gov/elections .
Statement for Statement against
The current King County Budget is an almost $5 billion financial
and policy document, affecting the almost 2 million people living
in King County. The budget covers the Sheriff’s operations, courts,
prosecutor’s office, jails, METRO Transit and wastewater treatment
among its issues.
In 1971, the Charter gave the Council 45 days to review and pass
the budget. Since then, the total county budget has grown from $112
million to almost $4.9 billion (a 43-fold increase) and has become
increasingly complex, adding responsibility for METRO Transit and
wastewater treatment. Also, the county’s population has increased by
approximately 600,000 persons. Meanwhile, the County Council still
has only 45 days to review the Executive’s proposed budget before
final passage.
This Charter proposal would increase the time for the Council’s
review from 45 to 65 days, adding almost 3 more weeks to review
the Executive’s proposed budget. Giving the Council more time to
review the county’s major financial document makes great sense in
these complex financial times.
The Charter Review Commission, King County Executive and all nine
members of the County Council support this proposal, because they
believe the existing timeframe for Council deliberation is insufficient.
Please join them in supporting this change.
King County Charter Amendment No. 6
Official Ballot Title Explanatory Statement
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Gary Long, Sarah Rindlaub,
Tara Jo Heinecke
No Statement Submitted.
King County Charter Amendment No. 6
Budget Deadlines
Shall Sections 410 and 420 of the King County Charter be
amended to impose deadlines that are twenty days earlier
than existing deadlines for county agencies to submit budget
information to the county executive and for the county
executive to present a proposed budget to the county council,
as provided in Ordinance No. 16208?
Currently, King County Charter Section 420 requires county agencies to submit
budget information to the county executive one hundred and thirty-five days prior
to the end of the fiscal year. Section 410 requires the county executive to present a
complete budget and budget message, proposed current expense and capital budget
appropriations ordinances, and proposed tax and revenue ordinances necessary to raise
sufficient revenues to balance the budget, to the county council at least seventy-five
days prior to the end of the fiscal year. If this proposed charter amendment is approved,
the deadlines for the required submittals by county agencies and the executive would
be twenty days earlier.
YES
NO
90 King County Elections is not authorized to edit statements, nor is it responsible for the contents therein.
The complete text of this proposition is printed in this pamphlet and online at www.kingcounty.gov/elections .
King County Charter Amendment No. 7
Charter Amendment by Citizen Initiative
Shall King County Charter Section 800 be amended to
establish a new process for citizens to directly propose
amendments to the King County Charter and to increase the
signature threshold for citizen-initiated charter amendments
from 10% to 20% of the votes cast in the last election for
county executive, as provided in Ordinance No. 16221?
Statement for Statement against
Currently, citizen-initiated amendments to the county charter are subject to a twostep process. By gathering the required number of signatures, citizens first propose
an ordinance that if adopted by the county council or the voters would then place a
proposed charter amendment on the general election ballot for approval or rejection
by the voters. If adopted, Charter Amendment No. 7 would dispose of the first step
of the current process and allow citizens to place a proposed charter amendment
on a general election ballot by gathering signatures of county registered voters in a
number equal to or greater than twenty percent of the number of votes cast for the
office of county executive in the last preceding election for that office. Under the
current two-step process, the signature threshold is ten percent.
The Charter currently does not explicitly allow amendment by citizen
initiative. The State Supreme Court crafted a process in a court decision.
This proposal improves that process.
This proposed amendment, supported by a majority of the Charter
Review Commission and County Council, would: 1) explicitly allow the
Charter to be amended by citizen initiative; and 2) bring King County
closer with the other Washington charter counties by establishing the
threshold amount for signatures on citizen initiatives at 20 percent
of the number of people voting in the last county executive election,
rather than the 10 percent fashioned by the court. Also, the proposal
eliminates the current requirement for a separate or “second” election
to place charter amendment initiatives on the ballot.
The Charter is our county’s Constitution. It should not be amended too
easily. The Charter Review Commission developed proposed charter
amendments after holding scores of public meetings and discussions
on the history, rationale and effect of the charter’s current provisions.
This proposal, which evolved from the Commission’s work, enables
the charter to be amended when significant numbers of county voters
seek a change, but makes the process significantly difficult enough that
voters will make amendments sparingly and very thoughtfully.
King County Charter Amendment No. 7
Official Ballot Title Explanatory Statement
The “con” statement attempts to confuse the issue by citing several
state initiatives that are not constitutional amendments.
The Washington state constitution does not allow for constitutional
amendment by citizen initiative.
By allowing for charter amendments, Amendment 7 gives King County
voters more power than state law.
Two writers of the “con” statement are paid political consultants
whose livelihood depends on keeping initiative signature requirements low.
Vote for good government, not for their business profits.
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Allan Munro, Tara Jo Heinecke
Don’t let politicians and their handpicked cronies on this
“independent” commission take away your right to vote. King
County’s signature requirement for initiatives is already 20% higher
than the state’s – Amendment 7 makes it nearly TRIPLE what our
state Constitution requires.
The King County Council isn’t just making it tougher – Amendment 7
makes it IMPOSSIBLE for anyone except big money special interest
groups to qualify for the ballot.
If such a huge number of signatures were required, none of these
citizen initiatives would’ve received a public vote: A smaller King
County council, voter picked elections officer, nonpartisan council,
public disclosure laws, performance audits of government, higher
minimum wage, property tax limits, medical use marijuana, sports
stadium tax caps, smaller class sizes, property rights, lower car tabs,
smoking ban, clean energy, exempting food from sales tax, higher
teacher pay. Amendment 7 would prohibit the citizen participation
that allowed these issues a public vote.
Since 2003 when the State Supreme Court recognized King County
citizens’ right to amend their charter by initiative, only 4 measures
have qualified. 4 measures in 6 years? It’s tough enough already.
The Constitution gave you your right to vote – don’t let politicians
take it away. VOTE NO.
There’s never been a successful citizen initiative in any county
requiring such a huge number of signatures. Our right to initiative
can only be exercised if there’s a reasonable chance to qualify for the
ballot. Amendment 7 makes it IMPOSSIBLE for anyone except big
money special interest groups. Amendment 7 overturns a UNANIMOUS State Supreme Court ruling and nearly TRIPLES the number
of signatures our state Constitution requires. It’s tough enough already.
REJECT AMENDMENT 7.
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Mike Dunmire, Chris Van Dyk,
Tim Eyman

YES
NO
Rebuttal of statement for
Rebuttal of statement against
91 King County Elections is not authorized to edit statements, nor is it responsible for the contents therein.
The complete text of this proposition is printed in this pamphlet and online at www.kingcounty.gov/elections .
Statement for Statement against
King County Charter Amendment No. 8
Official Ballot Title Explanatory Statement
Elections are about voters making informed choices.
Charter Amendment 8 simply puts less information about candidates
on the ballot. It does nothing to increase competition or attract more
candidates. Non-partisan city officials across King County routinely
run for re-election unopposed or with token opposition.
State voters chose a non-partisan primary system — the Top Two —
but wisely kept candidates’ political party preference on the ballot.
Don’t take away voter information — VOTE NO on Charter
Amendment 8.
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Mike Lowry, Sharon Tomiko Santos
Citizens have a right to know who candidates for public office are
and what they stand for. Political party preference is the single piece
of objective information about a candidate that appears on the ballot.
Charter Amendment 8 eliminates that information.
King County is not a small jurisdiction in which most citizens
know their elected officials personally. It is the 13th largest county by
population in the United States. The nine County Council districts
each include about 200,000 residents.
From January 1998 through mid-2007, a period of 9½ years, there
were only 23 straight party line votes by the County Council, or fewer
than three a year. During that same period, 94% of County Council
votes were unanimous.
The system put in place by voters when they approved King County’s
Home Rule Charter in 1969 has served us well. Under our present
system, voters can vote on the same ballot for candidates of any party,
and we do. Charter Amendment 8 denies the voters critical information
about the political philosophy that their elected officials will apply to
future decisions. Please vote NO on Charter Amendment 8.
Rebuttal of statement for
King County Charter Amendment No. 8
Nonpartisan Elections
Shall the King County Charter be amended to make the offices
of King county executive, King county assessor and King
county council nonpartisan, and to establish the nonpartisan
selection of districting committee members?
If this charter amendment is approved, the offices of county executive, assessor, and
council member would be elected according to general law governing nonpartisan
elections with the first nonpartisan elections occurring at the next regularly scheduled
election for each office. For the county executive and council members for oddnumbered council districts, that would be November 2009 and for the assessor and
council members for even-numbered council districts, it would be November 2011.
Nonpartisan elections would be held every four years thereafter and any vacancies
would be filled pursuant to general law governing vacancies for nonpartisan county
elective office. Approval of the charter amendment would also result in districting
committee members, who are appointed by the council every ten years for the purpose of drawing a countywide districting plan, no longer being appointed based on
political party.

YES
NO
What unites Democratic Governor Booth Gardner and Republican
Governor Dan Evans? They agree with over 64% of King County
voters that local government should deliver basic services to all citizens
regardless of party preference.
Nonpartisan county government will: • Improve voter choice
• Increase competition in elections • Reduce partisan bickering
• Restore local priorities and service.
Local elections are about voters making independent choices based
on a candidate’s qualifications, not party labels.
Infighting and partisan bickering are a diversion from addressing
the public’s real needs. There are no Republican roads or Democratic
stoplights!
Nonpartisan reform improves voter choice by attracting more
candidates and making elections more competitive.
Since 2000, eight county councilmembers have run for office
without any opposition. In 2007, partisan incumbents outraised their
opponents 26 to1! Voters need real choices in elections.
The voter-approved citizens’ initiative (I-26) proposing this
nonpartisan reform was supported by: • The Seattle Times • The
Seattle PI • The Municipal League of King County • Over 40
nonpartisan Mayors and City Councilmembers • The Greater
Seattle Chamber of Commerce • Over 80,000 signatures from
King County Voters.
Please Vote YES for real change in county government, Vote YES
on Charter Amendment 8.
Non-partisanship preserves our “right to know.”
• Non-partisan candidates are free to list endorsements on literature
and in the voters’ guide.
Non-partisanship encourages cooperation.
• Non-partisanship allows officials to work together without the
division of party politics.
• Of the 12 most populous U.S. counties, half are non-partisan.
Non-partisanship provides more choice in elections.
• Non-partisanship will end party control and attract more qualified
candidates to run for local office.
Please VOTE YES! www.bettercounty.org
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Booth Gardner, Dan Evans,
Sue Singer
Rebuttal of statement against
92 King County Elections is not authorized to edit statements, nor is it responsible for the contents therein.
The complete text of this proposition is printed in this pamphlet and online at www.kingcounty.gov/elections .
Statement for Statement against
We Need Mass Transit Now!
We’re like you - we work, take kids to daycare, want a clean environment. And, like you, we’re fed up with high gas prices, air pollution and
gridlock. We want solutions. Mass Transit Now is a huge step forward:
transit investments across the region—immediate relief and long term
results that help hard working families and our economy.
Mass Transit Now—more buses, more trains
• Immediately increases bus service – 100,000 hours of additional
service in 2009.
• Adds 36 miles of light rail that never gets stuck in traffic – expanded
north to Lynnwood, south to Federal Way, and east to Redmond.
• Increases the Tacoma-Seattle Sounder rail service with more trains
and seats.
Mass Transit Now—accountable and affordable
• We’re getting squeezed at the pump. For just $69 per adult each year
we can actually build solutions, instead of handing money to Big Oil.
• All projects are subject to strict independent audits, and our tax
dollars are spent on local projects in our communities.
Mass Transit Now has broad support
We can’t wait another year. Businesses, the Sierra Club, and voters just
like us all agree, we need Mass Transit Now!
Vote YES Proposition 1 – Mass Transit Now!
For more information, visit www.MassTransitNow.org .
Sound Transit
Official Ballot Title Explanatory Statement
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Mike O’Brien, Chris Robinson,
Carla Saulter
Just last year, voters said No to Prop 1, but Sound Transit simply
won’t listen. We said No because Prop 1 costs too much, does too
little, and takes too long.
No To More Taxes:
Do you know how many tens of thousands of dollars Prop 1
taxes you and your family during your lifetimes?
Prop 1 more than doubles its part of the regressive local sales tax,
forever...increasing the overall sales tax to 10% in some places.
No To More Empty Promises:
Can you name one promise Sound Transit has made, and kept?
Remember their Ten-Year Plan of 1996? It’s billions of dollars over
budget and at least ten years behind schedule.
Look closely at Sound Transit’s Prop 1 light rail plan. Few will ever
ride it, because it doesn’t go anywhere most of us go.
And Sound Transit admits their plans won’t reduce traffic
congestion. Most of Sound Transit’s riders are taken from existing
bus routes, only a few are “new” riders. Clearly, we can do better.
The Wrong Tax, At The Wrong Time:
Prop 1 is the biggest local tax increase in Washington State, ever.
Vote No...and join us online at NoToProp1.Org
STATEMENT PREPARED BY: Phil Talmadge, Kemper Freeman,
Gary Nelson
This year’s Proposition 1 is different – it’s TRANSIT ONLY, good
for the ENVIRONMENT, and offers IMMEDIATE SOLUTIONS to
relieve gridlock.
Value – For $69 a year, we get a regional mass transit system that
can move more than one million people each day. Accountability –
independent audits AND a tax rollback when completed. Solutions
– Opponents are anti-transit and have no plan. We’ve waited 40 years.
It’s time to move forward.
We need Mass Transit Now!
No to More Taxes for More Empty Promises:
For the existing taxes we pay to Sound Transit, they still owe us
more bus service, more Sounder service, light rail from Sea-Tac
Airport to the UW or maybe Northgate, and a test ride.
So why would we give Sound Transit any more of our money until
they deliver what we are already taxed for in their Ten-Year Plan of
1996?
Vote No to Prop 1, Again!
Proposition 1 expands mass transit in King, Pierce and Snohomish counties.
Express bus service will increase in 2009 on I-5, I-90, I-405, SR-167, SR-522 and bus
rapid transit on SR-520.
Light rail extensions will provide frequent service on exclusive track between employment and residential centers, including Northgate, Shoreline, Lynnwood, Mercer Island,
Bellevue, Redmond, Des Moines, and Federal Way. Streetcars will connect light rail to
Seattle’s International District, First Hill and Capitol Hill.
Sounder Commuter Rail adds daily trains with more seating between Lakewood and
Seattle. Train stations throughout the system will be expanded or improved. Broad Street
and Ballard stations are included, subject to available funds.
Transit connections will be integrated for passenger convenience. Facilities will be
accessible to senior and disabled riders.
Community grants may be awarded for better car, pedestrian, and bicycle access
to train stations, parking expansion, required infrastructure, including traffic signal
improvements.
The transit improvements will increase ridership, decrease travel times, and reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.
Fares, federal grants, existing and additional local taxes fund the improvements. Additional
local funding comes from a 0.5% sales tax increase, costing the average adult approximately
$69 annually. Taxes will be reduced when the plan is completed.
For more information, visit www.soundtransit.org .
Rebuttal of statement against Rebuttal of statement for
Sound Transit (A Regional Transit Authority)
Proposition No. 1
Mass Transit Expansion
The Sound Transit Board passed Resolution No. R2008-
11 concerning an expansion of mass transit. This measure
would expand and coordinate light-rail, commuter-rail, and
(beginning 2009) express bus service, and improve access to
transit facilities in King, Pierce and Snohomish Counties, and
authorize Sound Transit to impose an additional five-tenths of
one percent sales and use tax, and to use existing taxes to fund
the local share of the $17.9 billion estimated cost (includes
construction, operations, maintenance, interest and inflation),
with independent audits, as described in Resolution R2008-11
and the Mass Transit Guide. Should this measure be:

APPROVED
REJECTED
93
S 200th
Northgate
Brooklyn
Roosevelt
Mountlake
Terrace
Redondo/Star Lake
SeaTac/Airport
Federal Way
Tukwila
Renton
Mercer
Island
Burien
West
Seattle
Redmond
Bothell Woodinville
Issaquah
Sammamish
Auburn
Kent
Sumner
Bonney
Lake
South Hill
DuPont
Puyallup
S Tacoma
Lakewood
UW
Kirkland
Mukilteo
Edmonds Lynnwood
Shoreline
Des Moines
Highline CC
Capitol Hill
Rainier
First Hill
145th
Overlake TC
Hospital
Downtown
Bellevue
South
Bellevue
Overlake Village
Broad Street Bel-Red Corridor
Ballard
Everett
Seattle Bellevue
Tacoma
Link light rail
Extension: New service and
station
Planning, environmental,
design, and potential
right-of-way purchase
Existing light rail – UW to
SeaTac
Sounder commuter rail
New/improved service or station
Provisional station subject
to funding availability
Existing commuter rail service
ST Express regional bus
New/improved service
New Bus Rapid Transit (BRT)
service
Existing bus service
Other supporting investments
Transit partnership contribution
First Hill Link Connector
Sound Transit District
Legend
Mass Transit Expansion Proposal
The Regional Transit System Plan
for Central Puget Sound
Sound Transit District Boundary
The area inside the Sound Transit
District boundary shows the portions of
King, Snohomish and Pierce counties
where the Mass Transit Expansion
Proposal taxes would be collected and
the projects built.
www.soundtransit.org
94 The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority.
AN ORDINANCE proposing an amendment to the King County
Charter to create the elective offi ce of county director of elections;
amending Section 350.20 of the King County Charter, adding a
new Section 350.20.50 to the King County Charter, adding a new
section 647 to the King County Charter and amending Section
680.10 of the King County Charter, and submitting the same to
the voters of the county for their ratifi cation or rejection.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF KING COUNTY:
SECTION 1. There shall be submitted to the qualifi ed voters of King
County for their approval and ratifi cation or rejection, at the next general
election to be held in this county occurring more than forty-fi ve days
after the enactment of this ordinance, an amendment to the King County
Charter by amending section 350.20 of the King County Charter, adding
a new Section 350.20.50 to the King County Charter, adding a new
Section 647 to the King County Charter and amending Section 680.10 of
the King County Charter and to read as follows:
Section 350.20. Executive Departments.
The executive departments shall consist of the department of
assessments, the department of judicial administration, the department
of elections and those agencies of the executive branch which are
primarily engaged in the execution and enforcement of ordinances and
statutes concerning the public peace, health and safety and which furnish
or provide governmental services directly to or for the residents of the
county.
Section 350.20.50. Department of Elections.
The department of elections shall be administered by the county
director of elections who shall perform the duties specifi ed by general
law. The county director of elections shall be elected by the voters of King
County, and his or her term of offi ce shall be four years. The department
of elections: shall be an executive department subject to the career service
personnel system and shall utilize the services of the administrative
offi ces and the executive departments, but it shall not be abolished or
combined with any other executive department or administrative offi ce
and shall not have its duties decreased by the county council or executive.
The department of elections shall be responsible for the registration of
voters in the county; shall conduct all special and general elections held
in the county; shall be responsible for creating and printing the King
County voter’s pamphlet; shall maintain and be the offi cial repository of
political boundary maps, geographic information systems data and of the
King County copies of campaign fi nancial disclosure forms; and shall
administer other public and nonpublic elections, as required by state law
and county code and administrative rules.
Section 647. County Director of Elections, Term of Offi ce and
Compensation.
The county director of elections shall be elected as a nonpartisan offi ce
by the voters of the county. The term of offi ce of the initial county director
of elections shall end on December 31, 2011. Subsequent elections for
the county director of elections shall occur at the general election in 2011
and every four years thereafter. The county director of elections shall
receive compensation as provided by ordinance.
Section 680.10. Designation, Appointment and Election to Fill
Vacancy.
Immediately upon commencing their terms of offi ce, the county
executive, county assessor, county director of elections and county
sheriff shall each designate one or more employees who serve as a deputy
or assistant in such offi ce to serve as an interim offi cial in the event of
a vacancy in the elective offi ce of county executive, county assessor,
county director of elections or county sheriff, respectively.
Except for a designation made by the metropolitan county council, a
designation of an interim offi cial shall only be effective if the county
executive, county assessor, county director of elections and county
sheriff, each for his or her elective offi ce, complies with the following
procedure; commits the designation to writing; identifi es the order of
precedence if more than one county offi cer or employee is designated;
signs the written designation; has the written designation notarized; fi les
the written designation with the county offi ce responsible for records
and elections; and((,)) provides a copy of the written designation to the
chair of the metropolitan county council. The county executive, county
assessor, county director of elections and county sheriff may, at any
time, amend such designation by complying with the same procedure
established for making the designation.
In the event the county executive, county assessor, county director of
elections or county sheriff neglects or fails to make such a designation
within seven calendar days of commencing his or her term of offi ce, the
metropolitan county council may by ordinance designate one or more
employees who serve as a deputy or assistant in such offi ce to serve as
an interim offi cial in the event of a vacancy in the elective offi ce of the
county executive, county assessor, county director of elections or county
sheriff, respectively. A designation made by the metropolitan county
council shall be effective upon adoption of the ordinance therefor and
may be amended by ordinance; provided that a designation by the county
executive, county assessor, county director of elections or county sheriff
which occurs subsequent to the adoption of an ordinance shall take
precedence over the designation by ordinance.
The designated county offi cer or employee shall immediately upon the
occurrence of a vacancy serve as the interim offi cial and shall exercise all
the powers and duties of the offi ce granted by this charter and general law
until an acting offi cial is appointed as provided in this section.
The metropolitan county council shall, after being appraised of a
vacancy in the elective offi ce of county executive, county assessor, county
director of elections or county sheriff, fi ll the vacancy by appointment of
an employee who served as a deputy or assistant in such offi ce at the time
the vacancy occurred as an acting offi cial to perform all necessary duties
to continue normal offi ce operations. The acting offi cial shall serve until
the vacancy is fi lled by appointment pursuant to Article II, section 15,
of the Washington State Constitution for partisan county elective offi ces
or pursuant to general law for nonpartisan county elective offi ces, as
applicable.
A vacancy in the elective offi ce shall be fi lled at the next primary and
general election which occur in the county; provided that an election to
fi ll the vacancy shall not be held if the successor to the vacated offi ce
will be elected at the next general election as provided in Sections 640
and 645. The term of offi ce of an offi cer who has been elected to fi ll a
vacancy shall only be for the unexpired portion of the term of the offi cer
whose offi ce has become vacant and shall commence as soon as he or she
is elected and qualifi ed.
A majority of the county council may temporarily fi ll a vacancy by
appointment until the vacancy has been fi lled by election or the successor
to the offi ce has been elected and qualifi ed.
SECTION 2. The clerk of the council shall certify the proposition to
the manager of the records, elections and licensing services division,
in substantially the following form, with such additions, deletions or
modifi cations as may be required for the proposition listed below by the
prosecuting attorney:
Shall the King County Charter be amended to require that the
county director of elections be a nonpartisan elected offi ce?
SECTION 3. Following approval by the voters at a general election of
the amendment to Articles 3 and 6 of the King County Charter as provided
in this ordinance, the initial election for county director of elections shall
occur on the February special election date of the following year, as
provided in RCW 29A.04.330. The amendment to Articles 3 and 6 of the
King County Charter takes effect upon certifi cation of the results of the
election of the initial county director of elections.
Complete text of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 1
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority. 95
Ordinance 16204
Proposed No. 2008-0358.1 Sponsors Gossett, Constantine
 and Phillips
AN ORDINANCE proposing an amendment to Section 840
of the King County Charter, to prohibit discrimination on
the basis of disability, sexual orientation or gender identity or
expression in county employment and in county contracting
with nongovernmental entities; and submitting the same to
the voters of the county for their ratifi cation or rejection at
the November 2008 general election.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF KING COUNTY:
SECTION 1. There shall be submitted to the voters of King County
for their approval and ratifi cation or rejection, at the next general election
to be held in this county occurring more than forty-fi ve days after the
enactment of this ordinance, an amendment to Section 840 of the King
County Charter as set forth herein:
Section 840. ((Anti-Discrimination)) Antidiscrimination.
There shall be no discrimination in employment or compensation of
county offi cers or employees on account of sex, race, color, national
origin, religious affi liation, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression or age except by minimum age and retirement provisions((;)),
and the county shall not enter into any contract with any person, fi rm,
organization, ((or)) corporation ((which)) or other nongovernmental entity
that discriminates on the basis of sex, race, color, national origin, religious
affi liation, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression or
age except by minimum age and retirement provisions.
SECTION 2. The clerk of the council shall certify the proposition to
the manager of the elections division, in substantially the following form,
with such additions, deletions or modifi cations as may be required by the
prosecuting attorney:
Shall Section 840 of the King County Charter be amended
to prohibit discrimination on the basis of disability, sexual
orientation or gender identity or expression in county employment
and in county contracting with nongovernmental entities?
Ordinance 16204 was introduced on 6/30/2008 and passed by the
Metropolitan King County Council on 7/14/2008, by the following vote:
Yes: 8 – Ms. Patterson, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Constantine,
Mr. von Reichbauer, Mr. Ferguson, Mr. Gossett,
Mr. Phillips and Ms. Hague
No: 0
Excused: 1 – Ms. Lambert
KING COUNTY COUNCIL
KING COUNTY, WASHINGTON
Julia Patterson, Chair (signed)
Complete text of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 2
Complete text of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 3
Ordinance 16205
Proposed No. 2008-0359.1 Sponsors Phillips, Hague and
 Lambert
AN ORDINANCE proposing an amendment to Section
230.10 of the King County Charter, Section 270.20 of the
King County Charter and Section 270.30 of the King County
Charter, to reduce the number of county council members
on regional committees, establish a vice chair position
on regional committees, authorize the regional policy
committee to adopt its own work program and add authority
for regional committees to initiate legislation; and submitting
the same to the voters of the county for their ratifi cation or
rejection at the November 2008 general election.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF KING COUNTY:
SECTION 1. There shall be submitted to the voters of King County for
their approval and ratifi cation or rejection, at the next general election to be
held in this county occurring more than forty-fi ve days after the enactment
of this ordinance, an amendment to Sections 230.10, 270.20 and 270.30
of the King County Charter as set forth herein:
Section 230.10. Introduction and Adoption.
Proposed ordinances shall be limited to one subject and may be
introduced by any councilmember, by initiative petition, by proposal of
a regional committee in accordance with Section 270.30 of this charter
or by institutional initiative. At least seven days after the introduction of
a proposed ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, and prior to its
adoption or enactment, the county council shall hold a public hearing
after due notice to consider the proposed ordinance. Except as otherwise
provided in this charter, a minimum of fi ve affi rmative votes shall be
required to adopt an ordinance.
Section 270.20. Composition of Regional Committees.
Each regional committee shall consist of ((twelve)) nine voting members.
((Six)) Three members shall be metropolitan county councilmembers
appointed by the chair of the council, and shall include councilmembers
from districts with unincorporated residents. Each county councilmember
vote shall be weighted as two votes. The remaining six members of each
committee except the water quality committee shall be local elected city
offi cials appointed from and in proportion to the relative populations of:
(i) the city with the largest population in the county and (ii) the other
cities and towns in the county. Committee members from the city with
the largest population in the county shall be appointed by the legislative
authority of that city. Committee members from the other cities and towns
in the county shall be appointed in a manner agreed to by and among those
cities and towns representing a majority of the populations of such cities
and towns, provided, however, that such cities and towns may appoint
two representatives for each allocated committee membership, each with
fractional (1/2) voting rights.
The special purpose districts providing sewer service in the county shall
appoint two members to serve on the water quality committee in a manner
agreed to by districts representing a majority of the population within the
county served by such districts. The remaining four local government
members of the water quality committee shall be appointed in the manner
set forth above for other regional committees. The council may by ordinance
authorize the appointment to the water quality committee of additional,
nonvoting members representing entities outside of the county that receive
sewerage treatment services from the county. Allocation of membership of
each committee’s members who are city and town representatives shall be
adjusted January 1 of each even-numbered year beginning in 1996 based 
96 The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority.
upon current census information or, if more recent, offi cial state offi ce of
fi nancial management population statistics.
In the event any areas are annexed pursuant to powers granted to
metropolitan municipal corporations under state law, the populations of
any cities and towns in such annexed areas shall be considered as if they
were within the county for purposes in this section with regard to regional
committee participation on policies and plans which would be effective
in such annexed areas.
Members representing six and one-half votes constitute a quorum of
a regional committee. In the absence of a quorum, the committee may
perform all committee functions except for voting on legislation or a work
program. Each committee shall have a chair and a vice-chair with authority
as specifi ed by ordinance. The chair shall be a county councilmember
appointed by the chair of the county council. The vice-chair shall be
appointed by majority vote of those committee members who are not county
councilmembers, in accordance with voting rights that are apportioned as
provided in this section.
270.30. Powers and Duties.
Each regional committee shall develop, propose, review and recommend
action on ordinances and motions adopting, repealing, or amending ((countywide)) transit, water quality or other regional countywide policies and
plans ((relating to)) within the subject matter area ((for which a regional))
of the committee ((has been established)). The subject matter area of the
regional policies committee ((may, by majority vote, request that the county
council assign to the committee proposed policies and plans concerning
other regional issues including but not limited to public health, human
services, regional services fi nancial policies, criminal justice and jails,
and regional facilities siting)) shall consist of those countywide plans
and policies included in the committee’s work program by a majority of
the members present and voting, with no fewer than three and one-half
affi rmative votes.
The((metropolitan)) county council shall ((assign)) refer each such
proposed ordinance or motion, except those developed and proposed by a
regional committee, to a regional committee for review. ((When a proposed
policy or plan is referred to a))The regional committee ((for)) shall complete
review((, a time limit for such review shall be)) and recommend action
within one hundred twenty days or such other time as is jointly established
by the ((metropolitan)) county council and the committee, which shall be
confi rmed in the form of a motion by the ((metropolitan)) county council.
If the committee fails to act upon the proposed ((policy or plan)) ordinance
or motion within the established time limit, the ((metropolitan)) county
council may adopt the proposed ((policy or plan)) ordinance or motion
upon six affi rmative votes. The committee may request, by motion to the
county council, additional time for review.
A proposed ((policy or plan recommended)) ordinance or motion that has
been reviewed and recommended or developed and proposed by a regional
committee may be adopted, without amendment, by the ((metropolitan))
county council by fi ve affi rmative votes. If the ((metropolitan)) county
council votes prior to fi nal passage thereof to amend a proposed ((policy
or plan)) ordinance or motion that has been reviewed or recommended or
proposed by a regional committee, the proposed ((policy or plan)) ordinance
or motion, as amended, shall be referred back to the appropriate committee
for further review and recommendation. The committee may concur in,
dissent from, or recommend additional amendments to the ((policy or plan))
ordinance or motion. After the regional committee has had the opportunity
to review all ((metropolitan)) county council amendments, fi nal action
to adopt any proposed ((policy or plan)) ordinance or motion that differs
from the committee recommendation shall require six affi rmative votes
Complete text continued of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 3
of the ((metropolitan)) county council.
Each regional committee may develop and propose directly to the council
an ordinance or motion adopting, amending or repealing a countywide policy
or plan within the subject matter area of the committee. Such proposals
must be approved by a majority of the members present and voting, with
no fewer than three and one-half affi rmative votes. Within one hundred
twenty days of introduction or such other time as is jointly established by
the county council and the committee, which shall be confi rmed in the
form of a motion by the county council, the council shall consider the
proposed legislation and take such action thereon as it deems appropriate,
as provided by ordinance.
The council shall not call a special election to authorize the performance
of an additional metropolitan municipal function under state law unless
such additional function is recommended by a regional policy committee,
notwithstanding the provisions of Section 230.50.10 of this charter. Such
recommendation shall require an affi rmative vote of at least two-thirds
of the membership of each of: (1) metropolitan councilmembers of the
committee; (2) members from the city with the largest population in the
county; and (3) other city or town members of the committee. Nothing in
this section prohibits the metropolitan county council from calling a special
election on the authorization of the performance of one or more additional
metropolitan functions after receiving a valid resolution adopted by city
councils as permitted by RCW 35.58.100(1)(a) and RCW 35.58.100(1)(b),
or a duly certifi ed petition as permitted by RCW 35.58.100(2).
SECTION 2. The clerk of the council shall certify the proposition to
the manager of the elections division, in substantially the following form,
with such additions, deletions or modifi cations as may be required by the
prosecuting attorney:
Shall Sections 230.10, 270.20 and 270.30 of the King County
Charter be amended to reduce the number of county council
members on regional committees, establish a vice chair position
on regional committees, authorize the regional policy committee
to adopt its own work program and add authority for regional
committees to initiate legislation?
Ordinance 16205 was introduced on 6/30/2008 and passed by the
Metropolitan King County Council on 7/14/2008, by the following vote:
Yes: 8 – Ms. Patterson, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Constantine, Mr.
von Reichbauer, Mr. Ferguson, Mr. Gossett, Mr. Phillips
and Ms. Hague
No: 0
Excused: 1 – Ms. Lambert
KING COUNTY COUNCIL
KING COUNTY, WASHINGTON
Julia Patterson, Chair (signed)
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority. 97
Complete text of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 4
Ordinance 16206
Proposed No. 2008-0360.1 Sponsors Constantine
 and Phillips
AN ORDINANCE proposing an amendment to Section
630 of the King County Charter, to authorize the county
council to establish additional qualifi cations for separately
elected offi cials who head executive departments, including
the sheriff, assessor, and the proposed director of elections;
and submitting the same to the voters of the county for
their ratifi cation or rejection at the November 2008 general
election.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF KING COUNTY:
SECTION 1. There shall be submitted to the voters of King County
for their approval and ratifi cation or rejection, at the next general election
to be held in this county occurring more than forty-fi ve days after the
enactment of this ordinance, an amendment to Section 630 of the King
County Charter, as set forth herein:
Section 630. Qualifi cations.
Each county offi cer holding an elective offi ce shall be, at the time of his
appointment or election and at all times while he holds offi ce, at least twentyone years of age, a citizen of the United States and a resident and registered
voter of King County; and each ((councilman)) councilmember shall be a
resident of the district ((which he)) that the councilmember represents. Any
change in the boundaries of a ((councilman’s)) councilmember’s district
((which shall cause him)) that causes the councilmember to be no longer
a resident of the district ((which he)) that the councilmember represents
shall not disqualify ((him)) the councilmember from holding offi ce during
the remainder of the term for which ((he)) the councilmember was elected
or appointed. Additional qualifi cations ((of the offi ce of sheriff,)) for
those separately elected offi cials who head executive departments may
be established by ordinance.
SECTION 2. The clerk of the council shall certify the proposition to
the manager of the elections division, in substantially the following form,
with such additions, deletions or modifi cations as may be required by the
prosecuting attorney:
Shall Section 630 of the King County Charter be amended
to authorize the county council to establish additional
qualifi cations for separately elected offi cials who head executive
departments?
Ordinance 16206 was introduced on 6/30/2008 and passed by the
Metropolitan King County Council on 7/14/2008, by the following vote:
Yes: 5 – Ms. Patterson, Mr. Constantine, Mr. Ferguson, Mr.
Gossett and Mr. Phillips
No: 3 – Mr. Dunn, Mr. von Reichbauer and Ms. Hague
Excused: 1 – Ms. Lambert
KING COUNTY COUNCIL
KING COUNTY, WASHINGTON
Julia Patterson, Chair (signed)
Complete text of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 5
Ordinance 16207
Proposed No. 2008-0362.2 Sponsors Ferguson, Phillips
 and Lambert
AN ORDINANCE proposing an amendment to Section
310 of the King County Charter, Section 430 of the King
County Charter and Section 550 of the King County
Charter and addition of a new Section 425 to the King
County Charter, requiring the establishment of the forecast
council and the offi ce of economic and fi nancial analysis;
and submitting the same to the voters of the county for
their ratifi cation or rejection at the November 2008 general
election.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF KING COUNTY:
SECTION 1. There shall be submitted to the voters of King County for
their approval and ratifi cation or rejection, at the next general election to be
held in this county occurring more than forty-fi ve days after the enactment
of this ordinance, an amendment to Sections 310, 430 and 550 of the King
County Charter and addition of a new Section 425 to the King County
Charter, as set forth herein:
Section 310. Composition and Powers.
The executive branch shall be composed of the county executive, the
county administrative offi cer, the county assessor, the offi cers and employees
of administrative offi ces and executive departments established by this
charter or created by the county council and the members of the boards
and commissions, except the forecast council and offi ce of economic
and fi nancial analysis, the board of appeals and the personnel board. The
executive branch shall have all executive powers of the county under this
charter.
Section 425. Economic and Financial Analysis.
425.10. Forecast Council and Offi ce of Economic and Financial
Analysis.
The county council shall by ordinance establish the forecast council,
which shall adopt offi cial county economic and revenue forecasts that
must be used as the basis for the executive’s budget proposals. The county
council shall by ordinance establish the offi ce of economic and fi nancial
analysis.
425.20. Oversight of Offi ce of Economic and Financial Analysis.
The forecast council shall by unanimous vote appoint the chief county
economist who shall administer the offi ce of economic and fi nancial
analysis. The forecast council shall conduct an open and competitive process
to select the chief economist. The chief economist may be removed by a
vote of three members of the forecast council. The chief economist shall
be responsible for the employment and supervision of those employees
whom he or she deems necessary to assist in the performance of the duties
of the offi ce.
The forecast council shall approve an annual work program for the
offi ce of economic and fi nancial analysis and also may assign additional
economic and fi nancial studies to the offi ce.
425.30. Forecast Council Composition.
The forecast council shall be composed of the executive, two county
council members and a county employee with knowledge of the budgeting
and fi nancial management practices of the county to be appointed by the
executive. County council members shall be appointed annually by the
chair of the county council. Appointments to the forecast council shall not
be subject to confi rmation.
425.40. Revenue Forecasts.
By March 1 and at least one hundred-seventy days prior to the end of
each year or alternate dates approved by a majority of the forecast council
of each year, the chief economist shall prepare, respectively, proposed
preliminary and updated offi cial economic and revenue forecasts for county
government and submit these to the forecast council. Forecasts may be
adopted or revised by a vote of the majority of the forecast council within 
98 The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority.
fi fteen days of their submittal by the chief economist, or the forecast shall
be deemed adopted. The preliminary forecast shall be used as the basis for
the executive’s preliminary budget preparation including preparation of
the status quo budget, budget instructions to departments, and preliminary
review of departmental submittals to the executive. The updated forecast
shall be used as the basis for the executive’s proposed budget. The mostcurrent forecast shall be used as the basis for budget amendments.
Section 430. Contents of Budget.
The budget shall include all funds, revenues and reserves; shall be divided
into programs, projects and objects of expense and shall include supporting
data deemed advisable by the county executive or required by ordinance;
shall indicate as to each program, project or object of expense the actual
expenditures of the preceding fi scal year, the estimated expenditures for
the current fi scal year and requested appropriations for the next fi scal year;
and shall include the proposed capital improvement program for the next
six fi scal years. The expenditures included in the budget for the ensuing
fi scal year shall not exceed the estimated revenues as forecast under Section
425.40 of this charter.
Section 550. Career Service Positions.
All county employees and offi cers shall be members of the career service
except those in the following positions: all elected offi cers; the county
auditor, the clerk and all other employees of the county council; the county
administrative offi cer; the chief offi cer of each executive department
and administrative offi ce; the members of all boards and commissions;
the chief economist and other employees of the offi ce of economic and
fi nancial analysis; administrative assistants for the county executive and
one administrative assistant each for the county administrative offi cer,
the county auditor, the county assessor, the chief offi cer of each executive
department and administrative offi ce and for each board and commission;
a chief deputy for the county assessor; one confi dential secretary each for
the county executive, the chief offi cer of each executive department and
administrative offi ce, and for each administrative assistant specifi ed ((herein))
in this section; all employees of those offi cers who are exempted from the
provisions of this charter by the state constitution; persons employed in a
professional or scientifi c capacity to conduct a special inquiry, investigation
or examination; part-time and temporary employees; administrative
interns; election precinct offi cials; all persons serving the county without
compensation; physicians; surgeons; dentists; medical interns; and student
nurses and inmates employed by county hospitals, tuberculosis sanitariums
and health departments of the county.
Part-time Employees. All part-time employees shall be exempted from
career service membership except, effective January 1, 1989, all part-time
employees employed at least half-time or more, as defi ned by ordinance,
shall be members of the career service.
SECTION 2. The clerk of the council shall certify the proposition to
the manager of the elections division, in substantially the following form,
with such additions, deletions or modifi cations as may be required by the
prosecuting attorney:
Shall the King County Charter be amended to require the
establishment of the forecast council and the offi ce of economic
and fi nancial analysis?
Ordinance 16207 was introduced on 6/30/2008 and passed as amended
by the Metropolitan King County Council on 7/14/2008, by the following
vote:
Yes: 8 – Ms. Patterson, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Constantine, Mr.
von Reichbauer, Mr. Ferguson, Mr. Gossett, Mr. Phillips
and Ms. Hague
No: 0
Excused: 1 – Ms. Lambert
KING COUNTY COUNCIL
KING COUNTY, WASHINGTON
Julia Patterson, Chair (signed)
Complete text continued of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 5
Complete text of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 6
Ordinance 16208
Proposed No. 2008-0363.1 Sponsors Phillips, Ferguson,
 Hague and Lambert
AN ORDINANCE proposing an amendment to Section
410 of the King County Charter and Section 420 of
the King County Charter, to impose deadlines that are
twenty days earlier than existing deadlines for county
agencies to submit budget information to the county
executive and for the county executive to present a
proposed budget to the county council; and submitting
the same to the voters of the county for their ratifi cation
or rejection at the November 2008 general election.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF KING COUNTY:
SECTION 1. There shall be submitted to the voters of King County
for their approval and ratifi cation or rejection, at the next general election
to be held in this county occurring more than forty-fi ve days after the
enactment of this ordinance, an amendment to Sections 410 and 420 of
the King County Charter as set forth herein:
Section 410. Presentation and Adoption of the Budget.
At least ((seventy-fi ve days)) ninety-fi ve days prior to the end of each
fi scal year, the county executive shall present to the county Council a
complete budget and budget message, proposed current expense and capital
budget appropriation ordinances, and proposed tax and revenue ordinances
necessary to raise suffi cient revenues to balance the budget; and at least
thirty days prior to the end of the fi scal year, the county Council shall adopt
appropriation, tax and revenue ordinances for the next fi scal year.
Section 420. Budget Information
At least ((one hundred thirty-fi ve days)) one hundred fi fty-fi ve days prior
to the end of the fi scal year, all agencies of county government shall submit
to the county executive information necessary to prepare the budget.
SECTION 3. The clerk of the council shall certify the proposition to
the manager of the elections division, in substantially the following form,
with such additions, deletions or modifi cations as may be required by the
prosecuting attorney:
Shall Sections 410 and 420 of the King County Charter be
amended to impose deadlines that are twenty days earlier
than existing deadlines for county agencies to submit budget
information to the county executive and for the county executive
to present a proposed budget to the county council?
Ordinance 16208 was introduced on 6/30/2008 and passed by the
Metropolitan King County Council on 7/14/2008, by the following vote:
Yes: 8 – Ms. Patterson, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Constantine, Mr.
von Reichbauer, Mr. Ferguson, Mr. Gossett, Mr. Phillips
and Ms. Hague
No: 0
Excused: 1 – Ms. Lambert
KING COUNTY COUNCIL
KING COUNTY, WASHINGTON
Julia Patterson, Chair (signed)
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority. 99
Complete text of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 7
Ordinance 16221
Proposed No. 2008-0361.2 Sponsors Constantine, Gossett
 and Phillips
AN ORDINANCE proposing to amend Section 800
of the King County Charter, to establish a process
and signature threshold for amendments to the King
County Charter by citizen initiative; and submitting the
same to the voters of the county for their ratifi cation or
rejection at the November 2008 general election.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF KING COUNTY:
SECTION 1. There shall be submitted to the voters of King County
for their approval and ratifi cation or rejection, at the next general election
to be held in this county occurring more than forty-fi ve days after the
enactment of this ordinance, an amendment to Section 800 of the King
County Charter as set forth herein:
Section 800. Charter Review and Amendments.
800.10. Charter Review and Amendment.
At least every ten years after the adoption of this charter, the county
executive shall appoint a citizen commission of not less than fi fteen members
whose mandate shall be to review the charter and present, or cause to be
presented, to the county council a written report recommending those
amendments, if any, which should be made to the charter. This citizen
commission shall be composed of at least one representative from each of
the county council districts. The county council may propose amendments
to this charter by enacting an ordinance to submit a proposed amendment
to the voters of the county at the next general election occurring more than
forty-fi ve days after the enactment of the ordinance. An ordinance proposing
an amendment to the charter shall not be subject to the veto power of the
county executive. Publication of a proposed amendment and notice of its
submission to the voters of the county shall be made in accordance with the
state constitution and general law. If the proposed amendment is approved
by a majority of the voters voting on the issue, it shall become effective
ten days after the results of the election are certifi ed unless a later date is
specifi ed in the amendment.
800.20. Charter Amendments by Citizen Initiative.
Citizens of the county may propose an amendment to the charter by fi ling
initiative petitions with the county council bearing a number of signatures
of registered voters of the county equal to or greater than twenty percent
of the votes cast for the offi ce of county executive at the last preceding
election for county executive. The petitions shall contain the full text of
the proposed charter amendment. Publication of a proposed amendment
and notice of its submission to the voters shall be made in accordance with
the state constitution and general law. Submittal to the voters shall occur at
the next general election occurring more than one hundred thirty-fi ve days
after the petitions are fi led. Within ninety days after the petitions are fi led,
the county council may enact an ordinance to submit a substitute charter
amendment concerning the same subject matter on the same ballot with
the proposed amendment; and the voters shall fi rst be given the choice
of accepting either or rejecting both and shall then be given the choice of
accepting one and rejecting the other. If a majority of the voters voting on
the fi rst issue is for either, then the version receiving the majority of the
votes cast on the second issue shall be deemed approved. If a majority of
those voting on the fi rst issue is for rejecting both, then neither version
approved regardless of the vote on the second issue. Any amendment that is
approved by a majority of the voters voting on the issue becomes effective
ten days after the results of the election are certifi ed unless a later date is
specifi ed in the amendment.
SECTION 3. The clerk of the council shall certify the proposition to
the manager of the elections division, in substantially the following form,
with such additions, deletions or modifi cations as may be required by the
prosecuting attorney:
Shall the King County Charter Section 800 be amended
to establish a process process and signature threshold
for amendments to the King County Charter by citizen
initiative?
Ordinance 16221 was introduced on 6/30/2008 and passed as amended
by the Metropolitan King County Council on 7/28/2008, by the following
vote:
Yes: 9 – Ms. Patterson, Mr. Dunn, Mr. Constantine, Ms.
Lambert, Mr. von Reichbauer, Mr. Ferguson, Mr. Gossett,
Mr. Phillips and Ms. Hague
No: 0
Excused: 0
KING COUNTY COUNCIL
KING COUNTY, WASHINGTON
Julia Patterson, Chair (signed)
AN ORDINANCE proposing an initiative to amend the King County
Charter to make the offi ces of King County executive, King County assessor
and King County council nonpartisan, and to establish the nonpartisan
selection of districting committee members; amending Section 610 of the
King County Charter, Section 640 of the King County Charter, Section
650.20 of the King County Charter, Section 650.30.20 of the King County
Charter and Section 680.10 of the King County Charter, repealing Section
620 of the King County Charter and submitting the same to the voters of
the county for their approval or rejection at the next special election to
be held in this county more than one-hundred thirty-fi ve days after the
presentment of petitions to the King County council.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF KING COUNTY:
SECTION 1. There shall be submitted to the qualifi ed voters of King
County for their approval and ratifi cation or rejection, at the next general
election to be held in this county occurring more than forty-fi ve days
after the enactment of this ordinance, an amendment to the King County
Charter by amending Section 610, Section 640, Section 650.20, Section
650.30.20 and Section 680.10 and repealing Section 620, to read as
follows:
Section 610. Election Procedures.
((Except as provided in the Article, t)) The nominating primaries and
elections for the offi ces of King County executive, King County assessor
and King County council shall be conducted in accordance with general
law governing the election of ((partisan)) nonpartisan county offi cers.
Section 640. County Executive and Assessor.
The county executive and county assessor shall be nominated and
elected as nonpartisan offi ces by the voters of the county. The nomination
and election of the county executive and county assessor shall be held
every four years as a county general election at the same time as the
general election for cities in the county commencing with the election of
1971 for the county assessor and with the election of 1973 for the county
executive.
Complete text of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 8
100 The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority.
acting offi cial to perform all necessary duties to continue normal offi ce
operations. The acting offi cial shall serve until the vacancy is fi lled by
appointment ((pursuant to Article II, section 15, of the Washington State
Constitution for partisan county elective offi ces or)) pursuant to general
law for nonpartisan county elective offi ces ((, as applicable)).
A vacancy in an elective county offi ce shall be fi lled at the next primary
and general elections which occur in the county; provided that an election
to fi ll the vacancy shall not be held if the successor to the vacated offi ce
will be elected at the next general election as provided in Sections 640
and 645 of this charter. The term of offi ce of an offi cer who has been
elected to fi ll a vacancy shall only be for the unexpired portion of the
term of the offi cer whose offi ce has become vacant and shall commence
as soon as he or she is elected and qualifi ed.
A majority of the county council may temporarily fi ll a vacancy by
appointment until the vacancy has been fi lled by election or the successor
to the offi ce has been elected and qualifi ed.
Section 620 repealed. Section 620, “Independent Candidates,” of the
King County Charter is hereby repealed.
SECTION 2. If this ordinance is enacted, the ballot title for the
proposed charter amendment shall be in substantially the following form,
with such additions, deletions or modifi cations as may be required by the
prosecuting attorney:
This initiative would place the following proposed charter amendment
on the November 2008 general election ballot: “Shall the King County
Charter be amended to make the offi ces of King county executive, King
county assessor and King county council nonpartisan, and to establish
the nonpartisan selection of districting committee members?” Should this
initiative be adopted?
SECTION 3. A. If this ordinance is approved by a majority of the
voters voting on the issue, it shall become enacted when the results of the
election are certifi ed.
B. If this ordinance is enacted, the question of amendment of the King
County Charter shall be submitted to the qualifi ed voters of King County
for their approval and ratifi cation or rejection at the next general election
forty-fi ve days after enactment of this ordinance.
Complete text continued of
King County
King County Charter Amendment No. 8
Section 650.20. Nomination and Election.
County councilmembers shall be nominated and elected as nonpartisan
offi ces by the voters of each councilmember’s respective district. The
nomination and election of ((councilmen)) councilmembers shall be held
every four years as a county general election at the same time as the
general election for cities in the county commencing in even-numbered
districts with the election of 1971 and in odd-numbered districts with the
election of 1973.
Section 650.30.20. Districting Committee.
During the month of January, 2001, and by January 31 ((st)) of each tenth
year thereafter, a fi ve-member districting committee shall be appointed.
The county council shall appoint four persons to the committee, ((two
from each of the two major political parties,)) the four to appoint the fi fth
who shall be the chairperson. The districting committee shall no later than
April 1 following their appointment meet and appoint a districting master
who shall be qualifi ed by education, training and experience to draw a
districting plan. If the districting committee is unable to agree upon the
appointment of a districting master by April 1, the county council shall
appoint a districting master by May 31((st)) of the year.
Section 680.10. Designation, Appointment and Election to Fill
Vacancy.
Immediately upon commencing their terms of offi ce, the county
executive, assessor and sheriff shall each designate one or more
employees who serve as a deputy or assistant in such offi ce to serve as
an interim offi cial in the event of a vacancy in the elective offi ce of the
county executive, assessor((,)) or sheriff, respectively.
Except for a designation made by the metropolitan county council, a
designation of an interim offi cial shall only be effective if the county
executive, assessor and sheriff, each for his or her elective offi ce,
complies with the following procedure; commits the designation to
writing; identifi es the order of precedence if more than one county offi cer
or employee is designated; signs the written designation; has the written
designation notarized; fi les the written designation with the county offi ce
responsible for records ((and elections)); and((,)) provides a copy of
the written designation to the chair of the metropolitan county council.
The county executive, assessor and sheriff may, at any time, amend
such designation by complying with the same procedure established for
making the designation.
In the event the county executive, assessor((,)) or sheriff neglects
or fails to make such a designation within seven calendar days of
commencing his or her term of offi ce, the metropolitan county council
may by ordinance designate one or more employees who serve as a deputy
or assistant in such offi ce to serve as an interim offi cial in the event of
a vacancy in the elective offi ce of the county executive, assessor(,)) or
sheriff, respectively. A designation made by the metropolitan county
council shall be effective upon adoption of the ordinance therefor and
may be amended by ordinance; provided that a designation by the
county executive, assessor((,)) or sheriff which occurs subsequent to the
adoption of an ordinance shall take precedence over the designation by
ordinance.
The designated county offi cer or employee shall immediately upon the
occurrence of a vacancy serve as the interim offi cial and shall exercise all
the powers and duties of the offi ce granted by this charter and general law
until an acting offi cial is appointed as provided in this section.
The metropolitan county council shall, after being appraised of a
vacancy in the elective offi ce of county executive, assessor or sheriff,
fi ll the vacancy by the appointment of an employee who served as a
deputy or assistant in such offi ce at the time vacancy occurred as an 
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority. 101
Snohomish Counties and for the maintenance of both the environment
and economy.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of the Central
Puget Sound Regional Transit Authority as follows:
Section 1. The Board hereby fi nds and declares that the best interests
and welfare of the citizens of the Pierce, King and Snohomish Counties
region require Sound Transit to implement the Sound Transit 2 Plan, as
described in the document entitled “Sound Transit 2, A Mass Transit
Guide, The Regional Transit System Plan for Central Puget Sound”,
“Mass Transit Guide” herein, adopted by Resolution No. 2008-10
(July 24, 2008), which includes the following types of capital and
service improvements to further develop and expand high-capacity
transportation corridors and services for the region:
a) Light-Rail Extensions. Sound Transit shall plan, develop and provide
for the operation of an expanded regional light-rail system and other
associated or necessary system improvements, including the acquisition
of rights-of-way and real property interests, rail lines and rolling stock,
rail stations, system access improvements, and such other appurtenant
facilities as may be necessary for the implementation of the regional
light-rail system extensions as generally described in the revised Sound
Transit 2 Plan.
b) Sounder Commuter-Rail Improvements. Sound Transit shall
plan, develop and provide for the operation of an expanded regional
commuter-rail system and other associated or necessary system
improvements, including the acquisition of rights-of-way and real
property interests, rail lines and rolling stock, rail stations, system access
improvements, and such other appurtenant facilities as may be necessary
for the implementation of the regional commuter-rail improvements as
generally described in the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan.
c) ST Express Improvements. Sound Transit shall plan, develop and
provide for a better coordinated and more effi cient regional express
bus system and other associated or necessary system improvements,
including the acquisition of rights-of-way and real property interests,
rolling stock, transit centers, system access improvements, and such
other appurtenant facilities as may be necessary for the implementation
of an improved and expanded regional express bus system as generally
described in the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan.
d) Corridor Planning Studies. Sound Transit shall study future potential
system expansion options, including corridor planning studies to
identify potential investments for a future phase of high-capacity transit
investments, as generally described in the revised Sound Transit 2
Plan.
The cost of all necessary property acquisition, relocation, equipment;
construction, architectural, design, engineering, permitting, legal,
planning, and other related consulting services; inspection and
testing; administrative expenses; operations and maintenance, capital
replacement; debt service; and other costs incurred in connection with
the implementation of the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan improvements
shall be deemed a part of the costs of such improvements. Sound
Transit shall determine the exact extent, specifi cations and procurement
methods for all such improvements.
The Board shall determine the application of available monies
as between the various projects set forth above, consistent with the
fi nancial policies adopted as part of the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan,
and provide legislative direction as may be necessary to respond to
changed conditions and circumstances so as to accomplish, as nearly as
may be, all improvements described or provided for in this section.
In accordance with the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan, the Board may
issue bonds from time to time to fi nance the plan and use the proceeds of
the taxes approved by the voters as provided for herein to pay principal
and interest on said bonds.
The Board fi nds and declares that the approximate estimated cost
of the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan during the estimated fi fteen-year
implementation period, including costs incident thereto, is, as near
RESOLUTION No. R2008-11
A RESOLUTION of the Board of the Central Puget Sound
Regional Transit Authority calling an election to approve local
taxes to implement the Sound Transit 2 Regional Transit System
Plan; describing the proposed high-capacity transportation system
improvements; setting forth the ballot title and confi rming and
fi xing the Authority’s boundaries for said election.
WHEREAS, the Central Puget Sound Regional Transit Authority
(hereinafter Sound Transit), is the duly authorized regional transit
authority for the Pierce, King, and Snohomish County region under
Chapters 81.104 and 81.112 RCW. Sound Transit is authorized to plan,
develop, operate and fund a high-capacity transportation system within
the Sound Transit region; and
WHEREAS, in 1996, voters within the Sound Transit district
approved local funding to implement the Sound Move regional transit
system plan as the fi rst phase of a regional high-capacity transportation
system for the Central Puget Sound region; and
WHEREAS, most of the transit projects and services identifi ed in
Sound Move, including, Link light rail, Sounder commuter rail, ST
Express bus, and HOV access lanes, are either under construction, or
have been completed and are serving the public. Sound Transit currently
operates 238 express buses, 18 daily commuter trains, and the Tacoma
Link light rail line. Additional commuter trains will begin service in
2008 and 2009, and the Link light-rail line is on schedule to begin
operating between downtown Seattle and SeaTac Airport in 2009; and
WHEREAS, although Sound Move has effectively provided regional
transportation alternatives to address the current and future mobility
needs of the region, signifi cant population and employment growth is
predicted for the central Puget Sound region in the next several decades;
and
WHEREAS, by Resolution No. R2007-05 (May 24, 2007), the Sound
Transit Board adopted the Sound Transit 2 Regional Transit System
Plan to fund the second phase of high-capacity transportation system
improvements. The regional transit plan and a regional roads plan were
presented to voters as part of a joint ballot proposal as required by state
law; and
WHEREAS, the November 6, 2007 ballot measure to fund both the
Sound Transit 2 Regional Transit System Plan and a regional roads plan
did not pass; and
WHEREAS, after conducting a signifi cant outreach effort to seek
input from citizens about their regional transportation needs, by
Resolution No. R2008-10 (July 24, 2008), the Sound Transit Board
adopted Sound Transit 2, A Mass Transit Guide, The Regional Transit
System Plan (“Sound Transit 2 Plan”) that includes transportation
projects and services that cost less and will be completed and used by
citizens in a shorter time frame, and it includes revised fi nancial policies
to guide the next phase of development of the regional system; and
WHEREAS, the Puget Sound Regional Council will review the
revised Sound Transit 2 Plan for conformity with regional transportation
and development plans, including Vision 2040 and Destination 2030,
and the Expert Review Panel has provided and will continue to provide
comments on the plan consistent with RCW 81.104.110; and
WHEREAS, the funding and implementation of the revised Sound
Transit 2 Plan will provide improved high-capacity transportation
services, including express bus, light rail and commuter rail, necessary
for the continued mobility of the citizens of Pierce, King and
Complete text of
Sound Transit
Proposition No. 1 
102 The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority.
planning, design, construction, and ongoing costs to operate and
maintain the projects and transportation services that are part of the
revised Sound Transit 2 Plan and the Sound Move plan making up
the voter-approved regional transportation system. Additional voter
approval shall be required to use the taxes authorized herein for the
construction of any future program of capital phase improvements not
authorized in the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan or in Sound Move.
Section 4. For the sole purpose of providing funds for the planning,
development, permanent operation, and maintenance of a high-capacity
transportation system as provided in Chapters 81.104 and 81.112
RCW, and as described in the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan adopted in
Resolution No. R2008-10 (July 24, 2008) (and fully incorporated herein
by reference), and as described in Resolution 73, (May 31, 1996), Sound
Transit shall do the following:
(1) after allocating suffi cient funds to pay the ongoing monetary
obligations incurred to implement Sound Move as such obligations
come due, Sound Transit shall allocate the remaining excess revenue
generated by the taxes approved by the voters to fund Sound Move,
including the existing four-tenths of one percent sales and use tax,
and the existing three-tenths of one percent motor-vehicle excise tax
(which motor-vehicle excise tax shall not be imposed after 2028) to
pay a portion of the cost to implement the revised Sound Transit 2
Plan. The excess tax revenue estimated to be available to fund the
revised Sound Transit 2 Plan is $2.3 billion; and
(2) Sound Transit shall levy or impose and collect additional sales
and use taxes of up to fi ve-tenths of one percent as provided in RCW
81.104.170. This sales and use tax is in addition to the existing localoption taxes approved by voters in 1996 and described in subsection
4(1) above.
These additional and existing local-option taxes may be levied or
imposed and collected for the purposes described herein if the taxes
are approved for said purposes by the voters within the Authority’s
boundaries at the election called by this resolution pursuant to RCW
81.112.030.
Section 5. The local-option taxes approved by the voters shall be
levied or imposed at such rates and collected as of such dates as may
be determined by the Board pursuant to law. The Board intends for the
levy, imposition, and collection of the additional fi ve-tenths sales and
use tax to begin on January 1, 2009.
Section 6. The existing four-tenths of one percent sales and use tax,
and the existing three-tenths of one percent motor-vehicle excise tax
approved by the voters shall continue to be levied or imposed for the
purposes set forth in Resolution 75 and as provided in Sane Transit v.
Sound Transit, 151 Wn.2d 60, 85 P.3d 346 (2004), notwithstanding the
outcome of the election provided for herein.
Section 7. To ensure that implementation of the revised Sound
Transit 2 Plan occurs within the framework and intent of the fi nancial
policies adopted by Resolution No. R2008-10, Sound Transit’s
fi nancial statements will be subjected to a fi nancial audit each year
by an independent auditing fi rm, and Sound Transit shall appoint and
maintain an advisory citizen oversight committee for the construction
period. The oversight committee will be charged with an annual review
of Sound Transit’s performance and fi nancial plan, for reporting and
providing recommendations to the Board.
Section 8. The Sound Transit Board fi nds and declares that this
Resolution No. R2008-11 is the proposition to be submitted to the
voters to be voted upon at the general election to be held within the
Authority’s boundaries on November 4, 2008. The Board requests
the Pierce County Auditor, the King County Manager of Records and
Elections, and the Snohomish County Auditor to assume jurisdiction of
and to call and conduct such election and to submit this resolution as the
Sound Transit proposition to the voters, and to use regular polling place
or other authorized voting ballot procedures as provided in Chapters
81.104 and 81.112 RCW, and other applicable law.
as may be estimated, the sum of $17.9 billion (including capital and
operating costs and infl ation).
Section 2. In the event the funds legally available to implement
the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan, including, without limitation, the
proceeds of local taxes, fares, revenue, bonds, federal grants, and other
contributions from any source, exceed the amount required to pay the
cost to fully implement the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan, including any
unfunded projects, Sound Transit will use such excess funds as may
be determined by the Board to be in the best interests of the region,
which may include, but not be limited to, the application of such funds
to existing or new fund accounts, Sound Move plan improvements,
right-of-way preservation, expanded transit services and associated
capital and operating and maintenance costs, capital replacement costs,
reserve fund accounts for future operating and capital costs, reducing
debt service costs, or reducing the total level of bonded indebtedness or
reducing tax levies, and/or authorizing new improvements as the Board
deems appropriate, consistent with Resolution No. R2008-10.
In the event that the funds legally available to implement the revised
Sound Transit 2 Plan, including, without limitation, local taxes, revenue,
fares, bond proceeds, federal grants, and other contributions from any
source, are determined by the Board to be suffi cient to accomplish the
revised Sound Transit 2 Plan, Sound Transit shall acquire, construct,
equip, operate, maintain, replace, or make such improvements to the
facilities and equipment of the Authority as the Board deems necessary
to implement and achieve the objectives of the revised Sound Transit 2
Plan and of the Sound Move plan.
In the event that the funds legally available to implement the revised
Sound Transit 2 Plan, including, without limitation, local taxes, revenue,
fares, bond proceeds, federal grants, and other contributions from any
source, are determined by the Board to be insuffi cient to accomplish
the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan, Sound Transit shall use the available
funds for paying the cost of those improvements, or portions thereof,
contained in the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan or Sound Move that are
deemed by the Board, in its discretion, to be most necessary and in
the best interests of Sound Transit after consideration of the fi nancial
policies adopted as part of the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan. The Board
may amend the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan accordingly to refl ect such
adjustments to the plan as the Board, in its discretion, deems appropriate
under the circumstances, and as may be authorized by the revised Sound
Transit 2 Plan, this resolution, or by law.
In the event that the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan improvements, or
some portion thereof, are for any reason determined to be unaffordable
due to increased cost or insuffi cient revenue, or impractical or infeasible
to accomplish due to changed or unforeseen conditions or to force
majeure events, in addition, and supplemental to, the authority granted
above, the Board may also elect to implement the steps authorized
in the “adjustments to subarea projects and services” section of
the fi nancial policies, or amend the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan as
otherwise permitted by law or as provided by this resolution, and use
the available funds to pay principal or interest on bonds, and to pay
for such affordable and feasible portions of the capital and/or service
improvements identifi ed in the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan and/or such
other capital and/or service improvements that best achieve the stated
goals of the revised Sound Transit 2 Plan, as the Board in its discretion
shall determine to be appropriate or necessary in accordance with law
and Board policies.
Section 3. Voter approval of this resolution and the revised Sound
Transit 2 Plan incorporated herein shall authorize taxes to fund the
Complete text continued of
Sound Transit
Proposition No. 1 
The above text is an exact reproduction as submitted. King County Elections has no editorial authority. 103
RCW 81.104.140(9) requires that a local voters’ pamphlet be produced
as provided in Chapter 29A.32 RCW. Accordingly, the Board directs the
chief executive offi cer to request the county elections offi cials to print
a complete and accurate copy of this Resolution No. R2008-11 in the
voters’ pamphlet, and to coordinate on production and distribution of
the local voters’ pamphlet, pursuant to such arrangements as the county
elections offi cials deem appropriate and necessary.
Section 9. The chief executive offi cer is authorized and directed
to certify to the Pierce County Auditor, the King County Manager of
Records and Elections, the Snohomish County Auditor, and such other
appropriate offi cials, within the time required by law, a copy of this
Resolution No. R2008-11 as the proposition to be submitted and voted
upon at said election.
Section 10. The chief executive offi cer is further authorized and
directed to certify to the Pierce County Auditor, the King County
Manager of Records and Elections, the Snohomish County Auditor, and
such other appropriate offi cials, within the time required by law, a copy
of the ballot title for this Resolution No. R2008-11. The ballot title shall
be in substantially the following form:
SOUND TRANSIT (A REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY)
MASS TRANSIT EXPANSION
PROPOSITION _____
To expand and coordinate light-rail, commuter-rail, and express bus
service (beginning 2009), and improve access to transit facilities in
King, Pierce and Snohomish Counties, shall Sound Transit impose
an additional fi ve-tenths of one percent sales and use tax, and use
existing taxes to fund the local share of the $17.9 billion estimated
cost (includes construction, operations, maintenance, interest and
infl ation), with independent audits, as described in the Mass Transit
Guide and Resolution R2008-11?
YES....................�
NO......................�
Section 11. The Sound Transit Board fi nds and declares that the
boundary provided in Exhibit A-1 to this Resolution No. R2008-11 is
hereby fi xed as the fi nal election boundaries for the Authority’s election
to be held on November 4, 2008. The Board directs and authorizes the
chief executive offi cer to deliver, within the time required by law, said
fi nal election boundaries to the Pierce County Auditor, the King County
Manager of Records and Elections and the Snohomish County Auditor.
Section 12. The Board hereby authorizes the chief executive offi cer
to take any other and further actions deemed necessary to implement
the policies and determinations of the Board pursuant to this Resolution
No. R2008-11.
ADOPTED by the Board of the Central Puget Sound Regional Transit
Authority by not less than a two-thirds affi rmative vote of the entire
membership of the Board at a regular meeting thereof held on July 24,
2008.
 Greg Nickels (signed)
 Board Chair
Complete text continued of
Sound Transit
Proposition No. 1 
Official Ballot Title
 Statement for
104 The above statements were written by the ballot committees, who are solely responsible for their contents.
CITY OF SEATTLE
PROPOSITION 1
The City of Seattle’s Proposition 1 concerns increased property taxes for six years for Pike Place Market.
If approved, this proposition would fund seismic, safety, energy-saving, and other basic infrastructure improvements at
the publicly-owned Pike Place Market, last renovated in the 1970s, as provided in Ordinance 122737. It would authorize regular property taxes higher than RCW 84.55 limits, allowing collection of up to $12,500,000 in additional taxes
in 2009 (up to $73,000,000 over six years). Taxes collected in 2009 would be limited to $2.16 per $1,000 of assessed
value, including approximately $0.10 of additional taxes.
Should this levy lid lift be approved?
Yes
No
Those in favor shall vote “Yes”; those opposed shall mark their ballots “No”.
City of Seattle Proposition No. 1
Rebuttal of statement against
 Yes on Seattle Proposition 1: Support our Market!
 For over 100 years, the Pike Place Market has been a unique Seattle icon—and the nation’s oldest continually operating farmers market.
Nearly 10 million people visit the market every year.
 But time, weather, earthquakes, and increased use have taken a toll
on the dozen public-owned buildings that comprise the Market. The last
major improvements were completed in the early 1970’s. Proposition 1
is a true, once-in-a-generation request for needed basic capital improvements to our Market.

 Proposition 1 is a one time, six year levy for critical capital improvement.
 The Market pays for regular operations and routine maintenance
through rents charged to the vendors, artists and eateries that make the
Market so special. Proposition 1 will pay for needed replacement and
upgrades to the buildings themselves.
 • Replace outdated plumbing and wiring;
 • Install modern, energy-saving heating, cooling and venting
 systems;
 • Build new public restrooms and upgrade existing facilities;
 • Retrofit and reinforce walls and floors vulnerable to an earth-
 quake;
 • Improve access for people with disabilities.
 Because Proposition 1 will only pay for these one-time investments,
the levy will expire in six years. The annual cost for an average Seattle
household will be less than $42.
 Support Our Market: A Home for Small Businesses, Local Farmers, Affordable Senior Housing, Health and Child Care, and More
 We know the Market for fresh fish and flowers, fruit and produce,
crafts and tastes from around the world. Successfully managed by a public
non-profit organization, the Market must keep rents low to protect and
nurture small business, family farmers, and local artisans. This policy
also protects critical services including housing and services for low income seniors, a health care clinic and child care center.
 Proposition 1 protects the Market’s diversity and mission—a small
investment in a tremendous community asset.

 The Market is a Seattle treasure, providing affordable rent to local,
independent business—not chain or “big box” stores that are displacing
neighborhood businesses throughout Seattle. Periodic public support is
critical to keeping the market safe, accessible, and unique, drawing millions of visitors and residents annually and generating revenues that benefit all Seattle.
 There is no “fine print.” Funds are 100% dedicated to specific seismic,
electrical, plumbing, restroom and access improvements and will expire
after six years—no exceptions. It has been nearly three decades since the
last time Seattle voters were asked to invest in the Market; the current levy
will make needed improvements to last another generation.
 The Market is the physical reflection of our enduring Seattle values: an
incubator for independent business, a provider of fresh, local foods, and a
nurturing environment for the arts.
 Keep the Market strong. Vote Yes!
Statements submitted by: Chef Tom Douglas; Justin Hall, Fish Thrower;
Representative Sharon Tomiko Santos, 37th LD
 Yes on Seattle Proposition 1: It’s Our Turn to Support Our Market!
 A generation ago Seattle residents rallied to save the Market from the
wrecking ball.
 Now it’s our turn. Vote Yes on Proposition 1!
Endorsed by: Neighborhood Farmers Market Alliance; Allied Arts;
American Institue of Architects Seattle Chapter, Downtown Seattle Association; Friends of the Market; Greater Seattle Chamber of Commerce;
The Market Foundation; 34th District Democrats; Mayor Greg Nickels
and all nine City Council Members, King County Executive Ron Sims,
and Peter Steinbrueck.
The above statements were written by the ballot committees, who are solely responsible for their contents. 105
 Statement against
What this Ordinance Really Does as stated in the fine print of its 24
pages:
A “yes” vote RAISES property taxes for six years and REMOVES the
property tax limitation previously enacted into law (Chapter 84.55.010
RCW) to protect citizens from over taxation. It is vital to keep this limitation in place.
A “yes” vote unfairly and unjustifiably shifts the costs of Market renovations
onto property taxpayers. The City of Seattle, through the PDA, is running
an “in city” shopping center. It is fully leased; there is a Tenant waiting
list. Tenants pay rents and have over 10 million potential customers visiting
each year, so why are property taxpayers funding the improvements? Any
other shopping center owner must maintain his property without taxpayers
help! Before property taxes are raised, the PDA (Pike Place Market Preservation and Development Authority) financial statements and operating
procedures need to be examined. And why is the amount needed so great?
($73 million is more than the cost of our new 7 story City Hall and three
fourths of the cost/square foot to build a new shopping center including
land cost). What’s wrong here!!!
A “yes” vote will NOT result in $73 million being spent on the Market. A
“yes” vote will cost property taxpayers an extra $4.4 million in interest
by authorizing the City of Seattle to BORROW $68 million for six years
using levy collections to pay back the loan. Phasing construction would
eliminate this extra $4.4 million tax burden and all $73 million could go
to renovations, not just the $68 million. $4.4 million may not seem like
much but it would buy 17 new city buses, so why pay $4.4 million unnecessarily? The Pike Place Market already pays $1,912,990 in annual
interest payments.
A “yes” vote permits the PDA to use property taxes in a manner that enables it to obtain private investment in PDA owned buildings under Federal
income tax credit programs . . .” Do we want private investors involved
in our Public Market?
A “yes” vote will confirm and ratify “certain prior acts”. What are these
“prior acts” not listed in the Proposition text? Why are they omitted?
Citizens have a right to know what they are approving and what the asRebuttal of statement for
Proposition Number 1 would approve a six-year property tax increase to renovate the Pike Place Market. The measure would pay for improvements, such as plumbing, mechanical and electrical systems, roofs, elevators, windows, floors, building facades, restrooms, and seismic and fire
safety systems. It would increase taxes levied in 2008 through 2013 and collected in 2009 through 2014.
Proposition 1 limits the use of the taxes raised to projects identified in an agreement to be made between the City and the Pike Place Market
Preservation and Development Authority. The agreement sets out specific improvement projects, and states how much money from the levy is
to be spent on each phase of these improvements. The agreement also sets out additional improvement projects that could be undertaken with
the City’s permission. The Mayor and three quarters of the city council may eliminate or substantially reduce a specific improvement project.
The City may approve a substitute project.
To pay for these projects, Proposition 1 would authorize the collection of $73 million more in taxes over six years than would otherwise be allowed without a vote under state law. Without a vote of the people, State law generally limits property tax increases to 1% per year for the City
as a whole. No more than $12.5 million in additional taxes would be collected in any one year under the measure. The additional tax rate related
to this tax increase for any property owner in the first year of collection would be approximately ten cents per thousand dollars of assessed value.
If this proposition were approved, the total tax rate for the City in 2009 would be no more than $2.60 per thousand dollars of assessed value. The
final year additional taxes will be collected under this measure is 2014. Taxes collected in 2015 will be limited under the 1% growth rule as if
the taxes under this measure had never been collected.
Ordinance Number 122737, which placed Proposition 1 on the ballot, is reprinted in this voters’ pamphlet. The agreement referred to in the
ordinance, and the attachments to that agreement, are available from the City either electronically or by U.S. mail. Information about obtaining
copies of the agreement and attachments may be found in this voters’ pamphlet following the text of the Ordinance.
City of Seattle Proposition No. 1
City Attorney’s Explanatory Statement
How wisely our tax dollars are being spent is the issue, not how much
we love the Market. Removing the property tax limitation and raising
property taxes for six years need serious justifications.
Pike Place Market is a 100% leased, income-producing property, generating millions in income annually, not a park. We should be asking
ourselves, “Why isn’t the Market self-sustaining without burdening
taxpayers?”
This ordinance sets a bad precedent, overriding a law enacted to protect
citizens from over taxation. It is a misuse of property taxes and, as structured, financially irresponsible, costing millions extra in interest costs.
Reading the entire ordinance reveals other negative ramifications that
cannot be covered in the few words allowed here.
This ordinance is not the solution for many reasons. The City of Seattle
has other justifiable needs for your tax dollars. A vote “No” is a
thoughtful vote for financial responsibility.
Statements submitted by: Geri Kraft, Concerned Citizen
sociated costs are.
A NO vote is the only responsible vote on this very flawed ordinance.
Please read the entire ordinance to understand its full ramifications before
voting.
Official Ballot Title
106 The above statements were written by the ballot committees, who are solely responsible for their contents.
CITY OF SEATTLE
PROPOSITION 2
The City of Seattle’s Proposition 2 concerns increased property taxes for six years for parks purposes.
If approved, this proposition would fund acquiring, developing and restoring parks, recreation facilities, cultural facilities, green spaces, playfields, trails, community gardens, and shoreline areas; all as provided in Ordinance 122749. It
would authorize regular property taxes higher than RCW 84.55 limits, allowing collection of up to $24,250,000 in
additional taxes in 2009 (up to $145,500,000 over six years). Taxes collected in 2009 would be limited to $2.60 per
$1,000 of assessed value, including approximately $0.19 of additional taxes.
Should this levy lid lift be approved?
Yes
No
Those in favor shall vote “Yes”; those opposed shall mark their ballots “No”.
City of Seattle Proposition No. 2

Vote yes on passage of the Parks and Green Spaces levy today because it
is good for our economic and environmental future.
The Parks and Green Spaces levy will provide for parks, trails, playgrounds and ball fields for all of Seattle at an average cost of $81.00 a
year for the typical homeowner, a decrease of about $30 from the expiring
Parks levy.
As our city grows and becomes denser, it is important to continue to invest
in our parks and green spaces to protect our quality of life and provide for
an active and healthy lifestyle for all of Seattle.
Investing in our parks for future generations to enjoy—as we have enjoyed
Green Lake, Seward Park, Lincoln Park and the Arboretum—is good for
our whole community. We need to make similar investments as our legacy
for future generations.
New parks above the reservoirs in Jefferson Park, Maple Leaf, and West
Seattle will allow us to use existing facilities while opening those areas to
enjoyment and recreation.

The Park levy’s Opportunity Fund will allow other neighborhoods to create open spaces across our city, and provide for green space acquisition
that will guarantee parks, bike trails, and p-patches will be available in
Seattle’s most rapidly growing neighborhoods.
Just a few of the many environmental benefits the Parks and Green Spaces
levy will fund include:
 Clean water
 Healthy Forests
 Protection of Puget Sound
 Stream improvements
 Shoreline enhancements
For our children, the Parks levy will provide for the retrofitting of twentythree playground projects so that they meet current safety standards, including the fun and unique play facilities at Gas Works Park. And for our
athletes of all ages, sand playfields will be replaced with new, all-season
playfields.

Renewing Seattle’s Parks levy will promote involvement in our community. Parks are where our children play, our senior citizens walk, and our
athletes perform. They entice us out of our homes and workplaces.
Parks are where we meet our friends and neighbors.
Please vote yes today for the Parks and Green Spaces levy.

And for more information please go to our website:
seattleparksforall.com
The Proposition 2 citizens’ committee chose fiscally responsible projects to create safe, healthy places for all our neighborhoods:
 • Fixing twenty-three neighborhood playgrounds to meet current
 federal safety standards.
 • Creating new parks, trails, playground, spray pools and ball fields
 on existing City-owned property.
 • Acquiring new park land and open spaces before they are devel-
 oped, so that as Seattle grows denser we protect our quality of
 life.
 • Taking care of our forests and streams.
It will do all this for about $30 less a year than the typical homeowner
is already paying.
We’ve all benefited from past investments in Green Lake, Seward Park,
Lincoln Park, and the Arboretum. Now we need to make similar investments as a legacy for future generations.
Please vote yes on the Parks and Green Spaces levy—
seattleparksforall.org
Statements submitted by: James Kelley, Urban League; Mike O’Brien,
Sierra Club; Abe Bergman, Seattle Pediatrician and Board Chair of the
Seattle Children’s Playgarden
Rebuttal of statement against
 Statement for
The above statements were written by the ballot committees, who are solely responsible for their contents. 107
Proposition number 2 would approve a six-year property tax increase. If approved, the measure would raise up to $145.5 million in additional property
taxes. This is a new tax for parks. The current parks tax expires at the end of 2008.
The City Council has passed and the Mayor has signed a law that provides for how this money is to be spent. To change the spending plan, the Mayor
and three quarters of the city council would have to agree. The money would be divided into four very general categories, which are: (1) Buying land
for new parks or open space; (2) Improving or fixing existing parks; (3) Preserving the environment and promoting community gardens; and (4) Providing money for buying land or improving existing parks as identified by neighborhood or community groups. The general spending plan is described
below. The specific projects are listed in an attachment to Ordinance 122749, which is included in this voters’ pamphlet.
Buying land for new parks or open space.
In this category, the new tax would pay for two different types of purchases. First, the City would buy land in parts of the city that do not have enough
parks or open space. Under state law, the City is required to have a plan for using land in the city. This plan sets goals for the amount of land that should
be open space or parks. The parks department has used this goal to identify the neighborhoods in the city that do not have enough parks or open space.
Under this proposal, the city would spend up to $24,000,000 to buy land in these neighborhoods.
Second, the City would buy land in existing green spaces. The city has undeveloped green spaces throughout the city. Some of these green spaces
include undeveloped land not owned by the city. The city would buy some of this land to prevent future development in the green space. Under this
proposal, the city would spend up to $6,000,000 to buy land in green spaces.
In addition to this spending, up to $5,697,000 of the taxes raised will be set aside to cover the costs of inflation related to buying new land for parks and
open space.
(Continued on next page)
City of Seattle Proposition No. 2
City Attorney’s Explanatory Statement
Connection with nature is indeed the lifeblood of the Emerald City, which
is why, even without a levy, Parks and Recreation already consumes
8.4% of Seattle’s general fund expenditures. That’s more than we spend
for many things some may argue we need more. The 2000 Parks and Seattle Center levies currently funnel an additional 8.4% of all city property
taxes to the Department of Parks and Recreation. Also, don’t forget the
two King County parks measures passed last year, which are expected to
raise $217 million for some of the same properties. Meanwhile, the Finance Department projects a $10-20M shortfall for the rest of Seattle’s
budget next year.
Voters deserve to know exactly what they’re getting for an average $83
in extra property taxes each year for 6 years. What will $145 million
buy in this case? Good God, who knows for sure! the Council presents
an exhaustive project list that will confuse even the wonkiest of us. It’s
just as important to understand what this levy will not buy. This levy
is not for maintaining current parks or protect current wild spaces.
Rather this levy is for additional projects—in many cases more pavement than park. Some projects merely continue “master plans” from the
first levy. Some projects begin “first phases” with no end in sight. Many
projects might fail if voted on separately, as they’ve already been contentious among neighborhoods. As we have no line-item veto, we must vote
them all up or down.
Should this levy pass, $multi-millions will go toward non-park building
renovations, replacing sand with lighting and artificial turf at playfields,
dressing up reservoir lids, changing wading parks to spray parks, and extending roads and boulevards (including “first phase” of another inroad to
Allentown). There will be $11M in “safety” enhancements at 22 existing
parks. We’ll pay $24M for 21 new “neighborhood parks,” but 19 of them
are planned for “Urban Villages” (a.k.a. malls) which will arguably benefit private corporations more than the public... Is this what you had in
mind when you heard “parks?”
Love them or hate them, this proposal is for projects Seattle can’t currently afford, and will likely not be able to maintain in the future—
without more levies. This (or any other levy proposal) should be clearly
defined, sensible—and the exception, not the rule. VOTE NO on the Park
Levy That Ate Seattle—the sequel!
The forward-thinking voter will vote NO, because the proposal proposes too much as we face an economic downturn. Our economic future
depends on sustainable budgeting. Perpetual levies are fiscally irresponsible, and render levy lids meaningless.
The practical voter will vote NO, because a safety upgrade to a playground shouldn’t cost $1.4 million. Because this year over $500,000 was
added to an already sizable parks budget to maintain projects from the
last levy expansion. Because the Department of Neighborhoods budget
already includes money for p-patches and other opportunities for neighborhoods.
The tree-hugging voter will vote NO, because too little of this levy will
go toward the environment. Because it was foolhardy to lid the reservoirs
in the first place. Because impervious surfacing and increased auto access
to the shoreline aren’t “enhancements.” Because you know artificial turf
from a green belt, and a building from a tree.
Statements submitted by: Christal Wood, J.D.
 Statement against
Rebuttal of statement for
108 The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority.
 City Attorney’s Explanatory Statement (continued)
City of Seattle Proposition No. 2
Improving or fixing existing parks
In this category, the new tax would pay to improve 23 neighborhood playgrounds to bring them up to safety standards, building parks on top of three
water reservoir lids, building three skate parks and three spray parks, two off-leash areas, and building 11 new neighborhood parks. Under this proposal, the city would spend up to $33,090,000 to improve, fix or build these parks.
Also in this category are improvements and repairs to two city-owned cultural facilities: the Seattle Asian Art Museum, in Volunteer Park, and the
Langston Hughes Performing Arts Center. Both are managed by the Parks Department. The tax would pay for renovations including work intended to
make both facilities stronger in earthquakes. The city would spend up to $11,500,000 on these two buildings.
In addition, under this category, the tax would pay to install artificial turf at four sand playfields and new lighting at one of the four fields. The city
would spend $10,500,000 on these four fields.
The tax would also pay for additional improvements at major regional parks, including Jefferson Park, Discovery Park and Magnuson Park. The city
would spend $10,950,000 on these improvements.
Finally, the proposal includes projects to build and extend trails. The proposal would include an addition to the Burke Gilman Trail, a trail and park
along the Duwamish River and a link between Myrtle Edwards Park and Queen Anne. The City would spend $7,500,000 on these trails.
In addition to this spending, up to $14,002,000 of the taxes raised will be set aside to cover the costs of inflation related to improving or fixing existing
parks.
Preserving the environment and promoting community gardens
Under this category, the tax would pay for forest and stream restoration in the city as part of a partnership with a private organization. The city would
spend $3,500,000 for this restoration. The city would also spend up to $600,000 to restore parts of the Kiwanis Ravine.
The tax would also support community garden areas known as “p-patches.” The money would buy land for new p-patches and pay to convert existing
city land to p-patches. The city would spend up to $2,000,000 on p-patches.
Many city streets end at various points along the shoreline. This is public land that may provide access to the shoreline. Many of these street ends are
not improved for public use. The tax would pay to develop some of these shoreline street ends. The city would spend up to $500,000 on shoreline
street ends.
In addition to this spending, up to $1,410,000 of the taxes raised will be set aside to cover the costs of inflation related to preserving the environment
and promoting community gardens.
Providing money for buying land or improving existing parks as identified by neighborhood or community groups
Neighborhood and community groups from time to time identify property that they believe would make a good park. The tax would set aside money
to be used to purchase and build these potential parks. The city would spend up to $15,000,000 on these projects.
The law also establishes a sixteen member oversight committee to advise the Parks Department and review the progress of the tax.
To pay for these projects, Proposition 2 would authorize the collection of $145.5 million more in taxes over six years than would otherwise be allowed
without a vote under state law. Without a vote of the people, State law generally limits property tax increases to 1% per year for the City as a whole. No
more than $24.25 million in additional taxes would be collected in any one year under the measure. The additional tax rate related to this tax increase
for any property owner in the first year of collection would be approximately 19 cents per thousand dollars of assessed value. If this proposition were
approved, the total tax rate for the City in 2009 would be no more than $2.60 per thousand dollars of assessed value. The final year additional taxes
will be collected under this measure is 2014. Taxes collected in 2015 will be limited under the 1% growth rule as if the taxes under this measure had
never been collected.
The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority. 109
ORDINANCE 122737
AN ORDINANCE relating to regular property taxes; providing
for the submission to the qualified electors of the City at an election to be held on November 4, 2008, of a proposition authorizing
the City to levy regular property taxes in excess of the limitation
on levies in Chapter 84.55 RCW for the purpose of renovating
the Pike Place Market and its environs; authorizing the Executive
to enter into an agreement with the Pike Place Market Preservation and Development Authority; creating a new fund in the City
Treasury; providing for interim financing pending tax receipts; and
ratifying and confirming certain prior acts.
WHEREAS, the Pike Place Market has been a treasured landmark
since it was founded by the City of Seattle in 1907, and is currently
home to more than 250 businesses, 200 crafts vendors, 100 farmers, 500 residents, and has nearly 10 million visitors each year;
and
WHEREAS, in 1973 the City of Seattle established the Pike Place
Market Preservation and Development Authority (PDA) to own
and manage the properties of the Pike Place Market with the objective of preserving its historic qualities, assuring its economic
vitality, and promoting good management and harmonious relationships among Market users; and
WHEREAS, the PDA owns 85% of the property in the Pike Place
Market Historic District, which includes many buildings that are
more than 100 years old that have not had substantial renovation
for nearly 30 years; and
WHEREAS, the Pike Place Market is in need of major repairs to,
and replacement of, its basic infrastructure, including plumbing,
mechanical and electrical systems, roofs, windows, floors, building facades, and seismic and fire safety systems; and
WHEREAS, in 2003, the PDA formed a Citizens Advisory Committee to evaluate the Market’s capital needs, and options for funding and financing such needs, and this Citizens Advisory Committee, over the past five years, studied and evaluated the Market’s
operations, capital programs and various methods of funding such
needs; and
WHEREAS, in 2006 the PDA began an in-depth analysis of its facilities to identify necessary capital improvements to improve accessibility, operational efficiency, and customer service, decrease
annual repair costs, and preserve the Market’s historic integrity
and traditional uses; and
WHEREAS, in November 2006 a Renovation Committee of the
PDA Council was established to review the analysis and oversee
and monitor the further development of the Market’s renovation
plan; and
WHEREAS, a schematic design report dated October 19, 2007
identified priorities for renovation of Pike Place Market facilities
totaling $80 million, and on November 27, 2007 the PDA Council
affirmed its commitment and agreed to the plan’s further evaluation and development; and
WHEREAS, from November 2007 to May 2008, the PDA conducted public meetings with Seattle citizens and Market community members and completed both tenant and customer surveys to
collect opinions on the plan’s proposals; and
WHEREAS, on April 29, 2008 the PDA Council adopted a revised
schematic design report, which incorporated public input and identified $68.6 million in basic infrastructure improvements and $8
million in additional improvements to public and retail spaces;
and
WHEREAS, the PDA has requested that the City place before the
voters, on the November 2008 ballot, the question whether to levy
property taxes to pay for and finance basic infrastructure improvements at the Market; and
WHEREAS, the City has supported the PDA in its renovation effort by authorizing the PDA to use the General Contractor/Construction Manager alternative contracting procedure under the
City’s authority through Resolution 30989, and by dedicating City
parking revenues from PDA operated parking lots in the vicinity
of Pike Place Market to planning efforts for the Market renovation
through Ordinance 122562; and
WHEREAS, current and future citizens of Seattle will reap the
benefits of the basic infrastructure improvements made to the Pike
Place Market to preserve its existence and traditional use for many
years into the future; NOW, THEREFORE,
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SEATTLE AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the
following words when capitalized have the following meanings:
 “Agreement” means the Agreement regarding Levy Proceeds by
and between the City of Seattle and the Pike Place Market Preservation and Development Authority, attached and incorporated
hereto as Attachment 1.
 “City” means The City of Seattle.
 “Core Market Infrastructure Projects” means the infrastructure
projects described in Exhibit B to the Agreement (Attachment 1).
 “Director” means the City Director of Finance.
 “Levy Proceeds” means that portion of regular property taxes
levied and collected as authorized by voter approval pursuant to
this ordinance that are above the growth limit on levies in RCW
84.55.010, and all interest and other earnings thereon.
 “Market Infrastructure Projects” means the Core Market Infrastructure Projects and any Supplemental Market Infrastructure
Projects paid for with Levy Proceeds.
 “PDA” means the Pike Place Market Preservation and Development Authority.
 “Supplemental Market Infrastructure Projects” means the infrastructure projects described in Exhibit C to the Agreement (Attachment 1).
Section 2. Levy of Additional Regular Property Taxes
- Submittal. The City hereby submits to the qualified electors of
the City a proposition as authorized by RCW 84.55.050 to exceed
the levy limitation on regular property taxes contained in RCW
Complete Text of City of Seattle
 Proposition No. 1
110 The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority.
84.55.010 for property taxes levied in 2008 through 2013 for collection in 2009 through 2014, respectively, raising up to Seventythree Million Dollars ($73,000,000) in aggregate over a period of
up to six (6) years. The proposition shall be limited so that the City
shall not levy more than Twelve Million Five Hundred Thousand
Dollars ($12,500,000) additional taxes each year. All the Levy
Proceeds shall be used to pay or finance the cost of major repairs
to, replacement of, and additions to infrastructure such as plumbing, mechanical and electrical systems, roofs, elevators, windows,
floors, building facades, restrooms, and seismic and fire safety systems at Pike Place Market. The taxes authorized by this proposition will be in addition to the maximum amount of regular property taxes the City would have been limited to by RCW 84.55.010
in the absence of voter approval under this ordinance, plus other
authorized lid lifts. Pursuant to RCW 84.55.050(5), the maximum
regular property taxes that may be levied in 2014 for collection in
2015 and in later years shall be computed as if the limit on regular
property taxes had not been increased under this ordinance.
Section 3. Agreement. If the voters approve the levy as
provided herein, the Mayor is authorized to execute, on behalf of
the City, an Agreement regarding Levy Proceeds by and between
the City of Seattle and the Pike Place Market Preservation and
Development Authority, substantially in the form contained in Attachment 1, hereto.
Section 4. Deposit of Levy Proceeds. If the voters approve the levy as provided herein, all Levy Proceeds shall be placed
in and segregated within the Pike Place Market Renovation Fund
hereby created in the City Treasury. The Levy Proceeds may be
temporarily deposited or invested in such manner as may be lawful
for the investment of City money and all investment earnings shall
be deposited in the Pike Place Market Renovation Fund.
Section 5. Use of Levy Proceeds. The Levy Proceeds
shall be used solely for the purposes approved by the voters in
accordance with RCW 84.55.050. Up to Sixty-Eight Million, Six
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($68,600,000) of the additional taxes
authorized under this ordinance shall be used to pay or finance
costs of the Core Market Infrastructure Projects, as more fully described in Exhibit B to Attachment 1, and to the extent permitted
under the Agreement, to pay or finance costs of all or a portion of
the Supplemental Market Infrastructure Projects, as more fully described in Exhibit C to Attachment 1, or to pay or finance costs of an
infrastructure project substituted by City Council under Section 7.
Up to Four Million Four Hundred Thousand Dollars ($4,400,000)
of the additional taxes authorized under this ordinance shall be
used for the purpose of providing construction financing known
as City Financing as more fully described in Attachment 2. If it is
apparent that the portion of the Levy Proceeds for City Financing
exceeds the amount necessary for the City Financing (Attachment
2), the Council shall reduce the levy.
 Section 6. Bonds and Notes for Interim Financing. To
the extent permitted by applicable law, the City may issue bonds,
notes, or other evidences of indebtedness payable wholly or in part
from the additional taxes authorized under this ordinance, and may
pledge and may apply such taxes to the payment of principal of,
interest on, and premium (if any) on such bonds, notes, or other
evidences of indebtedness and to the payment of costs associated
with them.
Section 7. Alterations, Deletions, and Additions to
PDA’s Market Infrastructure Projects.
A. The City intends that the PDA will construct all Core
Market Infrastructure Projects shown in Exhibit B to Attachment 1
using Levy Proceeds and other funds that may become available.
If, however, the City determines in an ordinance passed by a twothirds (2/3) vote of the City Council that it is impractical or no
longer desirable to construct a Core Market Infrastructure Project
identified in Exhibit B, that Core Market Infrastructure Project
may be deleted or materially reduced in scope. If the City approves deletion or a material reduction in scope of a Core Market
Infrastructure Project, it may also approve substitution of a Supplemental Market Infrastructure Project (Exhibit C to Attachment
1) or a different project; provided, however, that any such different
project shall be a basic infrastructure upgrade to one or more PDA
owned buildings in the Market.
B. The PDA may seek supplemental, matching or additional funds from other sources to pay all or part of the cost of
the Market Infrastructure Projects. The PDA may apply such other
funds to one or more Supplemental Market Infrastructure Projects
or one or more Core Market Infrastructure Projects. To the extent
such other funds offset Levy Proceeds identified to fund Market
Infrastructure Projects, a like amount of Levy Proceeds shall be
available for application to other Market Infrastructure Projects, as
provided in the Agreement.
Section 8. Contracting Outreach. The PDA will, when
soliciting businesses for goods or services agreements in connection with Market Infrastructure Projects, perform outreach to small,
economically disadvantaged businesses, including those owned
by women and minorities. PDA agreements with businesses for
goods and services and with other public entities and non-profits
in connection with Market Infrastructure Projects will encourage
these entities to employ a workforce reflective of the region’s diversity. All PDA agreements for goods and services in connection
with Market Infrastructure Projects will require the contracting
entities to comply with all then-applicable requirements for nondiscrimination in employment in federal, state, and City of Seattle
laws and regulations.
Section 9. Reporting. The Director of the PDA will
prepare and submit to the City Council and the Mayor annual
progress reports on the implementation of the Market Infrastructure Projects defined in Section 1. The City will have the right to
audit the Market’s levy expenditures at its discretion.
 Section 10. Election - Ballot Title. The King County Director of Records and Elections, as ex officio supervisor of
elections, is hereby requested to conduct a special election, which
the City hereby calls pursuant to RCW 84.55.050, to be held in
conjunction with the state-wide general election on November 4,
2008, and to submit to the qualified electors of the City the proposition set forth herein.
The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed not less
than eighty-four days prior to November 4, 2008, to certify the
proposition to the King County Director of Records and Elections
Complete Text of City of Seattle
Proposition No. 1 (continued)
The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority. 111
in the following form or as modified by the City Attorney pursuant
to RCW 29A.26.071:
CITY OF SEATTLE
PROPOSITION NO. 1
The City of Seattle’s Proposition _ concerns increased property
taxes for six years for Pike Place Market.
If approved, this proposition would fund seismic, safety, energysaving, and other basic infrastructure improvements at the publicly-owned Pike Place Market, last renovated in the 1970s, as provided in Ordinance 122737. It would authorize regular property
taxes higher than RCW 84.55 limits, allowing collection of up to
$12,500,000 in additional taxes in 2009 (up to $73,000,000 over
six years). Taxes collected in 2009 would be limited to $3.67 per
$1,000 of assessed value, including approximately $0.10 of additional taxes.
Should this levy lid lift be approved?
Yes 
No 
 Section 11. Ratification. Certification of such proposition by the City Clerk to the King County Director of Records and
Elections in accordance with law prior to the date of such election
on November 4, 2008, and any other act consistent with the authority and after passage of this ordinance and prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, are hereby ratified and confirmed.
 Section 12. Severability. In the event any one or more
of the provisions of this ordinance shall for any reason be held to
be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision of
this ordinance or the levy of the taxes authorized herein, but this
ordinance and the authority to levy those taxes shall be construed
and enforced as if such invalid provisions had not been contained
herein; and any provision which shall for any reason be held by
reason of its extent to be invalid shall be deemed to be in effect to
the extent permitted by law.
Section 13. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take
effect and be in force immediately upon its approval by the Mayor
or, if not approved and returned by the Mayor within ten (10) days
after presentation, then on the eleventh (11th) day after its presen- tation to the Mayor or, if vetoed by the Mayor, then immediately
after its passage over his veto.
Attachment 1 to the Ordinance, Agreement regarding Levy Pro- ceeds by and between the City of Seattle and the Pike Place Market
Preservation and Development Authority
Exhibit A to Attachment 1 to the Ordinance, Projected Cash Flow
Exhibit B to Attachment 1 to the Ordinance, Description of Core
Market Infrastructure Projects
Exhibit C to Attachment 1 to the Ordinance, Description of Sup- plemental Market Infrastructure Projects
Exhibit D to Attachment 1 to the Ordinance, Acceleration and De- celeration Examples
Complete Text of City of Seattle
Proposition No. 2
Complete Text of City of Seattle
Proposition No. 1 (continued)
ORDINANCE 122749
AN ORDINANCE relating to additional regular property taxes; providing
for the submission to the qualified electors of the City at a special election on November 4, 2008, of a proposition authorizing the City to levy
regular property taxes for up to six (6) years in excess of the limitation on
levies in Chapter 84.55 RCW for the purposes of acquiring, developing,
or restoring, existing or new, parks, recreation facilities, cultural facilities,
green spaces, playfields, trails, community gardens, and shoreline areas;
providing for interim financing pending tax receipts; creating a citizens
levy oversight committee; creating a new fund; and ratifying and confirming certain prior acts.
WHEREAS, the Department of Parks and Recreation submitted, and the
Seattle City Council (Council) approved by Resolution 30868, the Seattle
Parks and Recreation 2006 Development Plan, which outlines acquisition
and development efforts to be pursued over the subsequent six years; and
WHEREAS, in 1995, the City of Seattle commenced its neighborhood
planning process as part of an overall strategy to manage the City’s
growth through the Comprehensive Plan in response to the State’s Growth
Management Act and has been implementing those plans since 2000, with
many park recommendations still not completed in 2008; and
WHEREAS, the Council embraced the Goals and Principles of Open
Space Seattle 2100 byproclamation in May 2006 and later endorsed Open
Space Seattle 2100 concepts to integrate green infrastructure and urban
sustainability efforts; and
WHEREAS, in 2007 the Seattle Parks Foundation updated the 1990 Bands
of Green report to guide collaborative efforts to improve Seattle’s green
connections, including recommendations pertaining to Seattle’s Department of Transportation and Department of Parks and Recreation; and
WHEREAS, the Seattle Green Partnership was created in 2004 by Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Seattle and the Cascade
Land Conservancy to undertake a 20-year coordinated effort, including
city and private funding and a large amount of volunteer support, to restore and maintain healthy urban forests; and
WHEREAS, Resolution 29370 adopted policies to guide the development
of public access improvements to shoreline street ends, which has led to
a 2008 draft of a Shoreline Street End Master Plan with identified implementation projects; and
Attachment 2 to the Ordinance, City Financing
The two attachments and four exhibits are available at www2.seattle.gov/ethics/votersguide.asp and at clerk.ci.seattle.wa.us/levyattachments. To request copies please call or e-mail the Seattle Ethics and Elections Commission at 684-8500 or ethicsandelections@
seattle.gov, or the City Clerk at 684-8344 or clerk@seattle.gov.
You may also obtain copies by visiting the Seattle Ethics and Elections Commission in Suite 4010 of the Seattle Municipal Tower
at 700 Fifth Avenue, or the City Clerk’s office on Floor 3 of City
Hall, located at 600 Fourth Avenue. Both offices are open from
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except holidays. If
you would like to write to request copies, please write to the Seattle Ethics and Elections Commission at P.O. Box 94729, Seattle,
WA 98124-4729, or to the City Clerk at P.O. Box 94728, Seattle,
WA 98124-4728. There is no charge for copies.
112 The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority.
Complete Text of City of Seattle
Proposition No. 2 (continued)
WHEREAS, Resolution 30194 adopted a Five-Year Strategic Plan as
guidance for the expansion of Seattle’s community gardening program
and actions to implement the plan; and
WHEREAS, in Resolution 29681, the City Council endorsed the 1997
Joint Athletic Facilities Development Program identifying priority athletic field and gymnasium improvements on City and Seattle School District
property consistent with applicable adopted plans and the public process
conducted by the Department of Parks and Recreation’s Sportsfield Review Committee; and
WHEREAS, the Council adopted Resolution 31019 in April 2008 establishing goals, creating a policy framework and identifying actions for the
purpose of strengthening Seattle’s food system sustainability and security; and
WHEREAS, in Resolution 31055 the Council created the Parks and Green
Spaces Levy Citizens’ Advisory Committee to ensure citizen participation
in the development of a potential package of parks, open space, boulevards, trails, green infrastructure, and recreation projects and a proposed
set of options to fund the package; and
WHEREAS, the Parks and Green Spaces Levy Citizens’ Advisory Committee, after being duly appointed and after spending many hours in open
meetings, receiving public testimony and deliberating, has voted by a
strong majority to recommended that the Council place before the voters
of Seattle a $140 million six-year levy proposal; and
WHEREAS, the City will seek to leverage funds through collaboration
with County, State, and Federal sources and with private and non-profit
organizations, including the Seattle Parks Foundation, through the development of partnerships for purposes of enhancing the projects funded
through the levy lid lift; and
WHEREAS, interim financing may be needed prior to the receipt of tax
receipts from the levy lid lift proposed in this ordinance; NOW, THEREFORE,
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SEATTLE AS FOLLOWS:
 Section 1. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the following words
shall have the following meanings:
 “Green spaces” includes but is not limited to open space, greenbelts,
greenspaces as defined in Resolution 28653 (also known as the Greenspaces Policy Resolution), and other open areas.
 “Neighborhood parks” includes but is not limited to existing parks,
new parks identified in neighborhood plans, new parks identified in the
Seattle’s Parks and Recreation 2006 Development Plan, boulevards, and
other properties purchased by the City for open-space and recreational
purposes.
 “Playfields” includes but is not limited to existing or new athletic
fields, open play spaces, and similar areas, including spectator enhancements such as seating. Playfields does not include facilities designed for
professional sports organizations.
 Section 2. Levy of Additional Regular Property Taxes - Submittal.
The City hereby submits to the qualified electors of the City a proposition
as authorized by RCW 84.55.050 to exceed the levy limitation on regular
property taxes contained in RCW 84.55.010 for property taxes levied in
2008 through 2013 for collection in 2009 through 2014, respectively, raising up to One Hundred Forty-Five Million Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($145,500,000) in aggregate over a period of up to six (6) years. The
proposition shall be limited so that the City shall not levy more than Twenty-Four Million Two Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($24,250,000) in
additional taxes each year. All the Levy Proceeds shall be used to acquire,
develop, or restore, existing or new, parks, recreation facilities, cultural
facilities, green spaces, playfields, trails, community gardens, and shoreline areas.. The taxes authorized by this proposition will be in addition to
the maximum amount of regular property taxes the City would have been
limited to by RCW 84.55.010 in the absence of voter approval under this
ordinance, plus other authorized lid lifts. Pursuant to RCW 84.55.050(5),
the maximum regular property taxes that may be levied in 2014 for collection in 2015 and in later years shall be computed as if the limit on regular
property taxes had not been increased under this ordinance.
 Section 3. Use of Funds. Proceeds and interest earnings from the
additional taxes levied pursuant to this ordinance shall be applied as follows:
 A. Categories, subcategories and projects: There are four major categories for funding: 1) Acquisition; 2) Development; 3) Environment; and
4) Opportunity Fund. These categories are subdivided into subcategories,
and projects, as shown in Attachment A to this ordinance, which is incorporated herein by reference. Each year as part of the annual budget process,
the Superintendent of Parks and Recreation (the “Superintendent”) shall
submit a proposed spending plan allocating expected additional taxes and
interest earnings among the categories, subcategories, and projects for the
coming year. Over the term of the levy, total funding from levy funds for
each category and subcategory will be consistent with the amounts identified in Attachment A, unless the City Council by three-fourths (3/4) vote
determines otherwise, after considering any recommendations that may
have been made by the oversight committee established in Section 5.
 1. The scope for each project will be defined in the City of Seattle’s
Capital Improvement Program. Council anticipates that the proposed
scopes of projects will be developed by the Department of Parks and Recreation through a community process, building upon already developed
plans where they exist. Projects may be deleted only by a three-fourths
(3/4) vote of the City Council after considering any recommendations that
may have been made by the oversight committee established in Section 5.
If the City Council approves deletion of a project, the Council may also
approve substitution of a different project.
 2. Subcategories in the Acquisition, Development and Environment
categories shall be allocated from the 2008 Parks Levy Fund created by
Section 4 up to the amounts shown as the respective subcategory allocations in Attachment A. The City may seek supplemental, matching or additional funds from other sources to pay all or part of the cost of a project
and, if successful, may apply such funds to accomplishment thereof or
to complement or enlarge a project. If all of the projects in an Acquisition, Development or Environment subcategory have been completed
or deleted and additional taxes collected under this ordinance (and any
interest earnings thereon) that were allocated to that subcategory remain
unexpended, then those proceeds and earnings shall be added to the Opportunity Fund category.
 3. Funds allocated to the Opportunity Fund category shall be used only
as provided in this subsection 3. Projects identified by neighborhood and 
The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority. 113
Complete Text of City of Seattle
Proposition No. 2 (continued)
community groups may be funded as part of the Opportunity Fund category by ordinance, after City Council consideration of any recommendations
that may have been made by the oversight committee established in Section 5. Opportunity Fund resources can be used to pay for projects including, but not limited to, the acquisition and/or development of off-leash
areas, community gardens, P-Patches, trails and neighborhood parks. In
making its recommendations regarding the funding of Opportunity Fund
projects, the oversight committee will consider the following criteria.
 a. Has the project been subject to a public review process or is it
consistent with approved plans, such as a neighborhood plan or a watershed plan?
 b. Does the project address a park or open space deficiency or
underserved community?
 c. Is the project in an area experiencing growth, particularly an
urban village or urban center?
 d. Does the project address an immediate health or safety problem, or take advantage of an opportunity that will be lost unless action is
taken?
 e. Does the project contribute to solving major challenges facing
our community, such as climate change, the health of our waterways, or
growth management?
 f. Does the project have the potential to leverage other resources
through the actions of other public agencies, funding from public, private
or philanthropic partners, and/or in-kind contributions of time and energy
from citizen volunteers?
 g. Does the project result in significantly higher operating costs for
the City?
 h. Does the project demonstrate new and creative meth ods to
meet the community’s needs for parks and green spaces? and/or
 i. Does the project demonstrate a high degree of neighborhood
involvement and support?
 B. Funds and appropriations unexpended at the end of any budget year
shall automatically be carried over to the next budget year.
 C. If the Council does not appropriate at least Twelve Million Dollars ($12,000,000) in the annual budget for park and recreation capital
purposes from resources other than the levy proceeds, the Council may
not levy any revenues for collection in that budget year unless the City
Council by a three-fourths (3/4) vote determines that a natural disaster or
exigent economic circumstances prevents the Council from appropriating
the money from other resources.
 Section 4. Deposit of Proceeds. The additional taxes authorized
under this ordinance shall be deposited into the 2008 Parks Levy Fund,
which is hereby created in the City Treasury. Money in that Fund may be
temporarily deposited or invested in such manner as may be lawful for the
investment of City money and interest and other earnings shall be deposited in the Fund. The additional taxes and any interest or other earnings
from their deposit or investment shall be applied solely for the projects
authorized pursuant to this ordinance. The Finance Director is authorized
to create other funds, subfunds, or accounts as may be needed to implement the purposes of this ordinance.
 Section 5. Oversight Committee. The 2008 Parks and Green Spaces
Levy Oversight Committee (“Oversight Committee”) is hereby established to review the expenditure of the additional tax proceeds and resultant interest earnings, to advise upon expenditures and allocations for the
following year, and to make recommendations on the implementation of
particular projects and on any reallocations. The Oversight Committee
shall have immediate and direct access to the financial and accounting
records of all levy funded projects for the life of the levy. The Oversight
Committee may solicit public comments on the expenditures and the financial accounting of all levy projects. Unless changed by a majority
of the Committee, the Committee will meet at least bi-monthly with the
Superintendent or his/her designee, beginning in the calendar quarter following the successful passage of the levy lid lift.
 The oversight committee shall consist of sixteen members, and shall
include representatives from the following categories: (a) six (6) committee members shall be Seattle residents representing diverse geographic
areas; (b) one (1) committee member shall be a member of the Board of
Parks Commissioners; and (c) the remaining nine (9) committee members
shall be selected from among the diverse constituencies served by and interested in the projects to be funded by this measure. The mayor and city
council each shall appoint eight oversight committee members. Four of
the initial oversight committee appointees shall be chosen from among the
Park and Green Spaces Levy Citizens’ Advisory Committee; two of these
members shall be chosen by the mayor, and two by the city council. Upon
the resignation, retirement, death incapacity or removal of an oversight
committee member, the appointing authority shall appoint a replacement
to serve the balance of the term. All oversight committee members appointed or reappointed by the mayor, including replacements, are subject
to confirmation by the City Council. Oversight committee members shall
be appointed to three (3) year staggered terms subject to reappointment,
except that five (5) members of the body shall be initially appointed for
a single year term, five (5) members for a two (2) year term, and a the
remainder for a three (3) year term. Members shall be subject to removal
by their appointing authority. Members shall serve without pay, but may
be reimbursed their expenses, including payments for child care while
attending meetings. The Oversight Committee will adopt criteria, including but not necessarily limited to those listed in Section 3, for making
its recommendations concerning the Opportunity Fund category and will
make recommendations to the Superintendent, Mayor, and City Council.
The Oversight Committee may adopt rules for its own procedures, including quorum requirements and the frequency of meetings. The Oversight
Committee will make annual reports to the Mayor and City Council and
will prepare a mid-point report to the citizens of Seattle. The Department of Parks and Recreation shall provide staff and logistical support
for the Oversight Committee. The Oversight Committee shall continue
in existence through December 31, 2014, and thereafter if so provided by
ordinance.
 Section 6. Bond and Notes. To the extent permitted by applicable
law the City may issue bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness
payable wholly or in part from the proceeds of the additional taxes authorized under this ordinance, and apply such tax proceeds to the payment
of principal of, interest on, and premium (if any) on such bonds, notes,
or other evidences of indebtedness and to the payment of costs associated
with them.
 Section 7. Election - Ballot Title. The King County Director of 
114 The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority.
Attachment A
Complete Text of City of Seattle
Proposition No. 2 (continued)
Records and Elections, as ex officio supervisor of elections, is hereby requested to conduct a special election, which the City hereby calls pursuant
to RCW 84.55.050, to be held in conjunction with the state-wide general
election on November 4, 2008, and to submit to the qualified electors of
the City the proposition set forth herein.
 The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed not less than eightyfour days prior to November 4, 2008, to certify the proposition to the King
County Director of Records and Elections in the following form or as
modified by the City Attorney pursuant to RCW 29A.26.071:
CITY OF SEATTLE
PROPOSITION NO. 2
The City of Seattle’s Proposition 2 concerns increased property taxes for
six years for parks purposes.
If approved, this proposition would fund acquiring, developing and restoring parks, recreation facilities, cultural facilities, green spaces, playfields,
trails, community gardens, and shoreline areas as provided in Ordinance
122749. It would authorize regular property taxes higher than RCW
84.55 limits, allowing collection of up to $24,250,000 in additional taxes
in 2009 (up to $145,500,000 over six years). Taxes collected in 2009
would be limited to $3.67 per $1,000 of assessed value, including approximately $0.18 of additional taxes.
Should this levy lid lift be approved?
Levy, Yes
Levy, No 
Those in favor shall vote “Yes”; those opposed shall mark their ballots
“No”.
 Section 8. Severability. In the event any one or more of the provisions of this ordinance shall for any reason be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this ordinance or the levy of
the additional taxes authorized herein, but this ordinance and the authority
to levy those taxes shall be construed and enforced as if such invalid provisions had not been contained herein; and any provision which shall for
any reason be held by reason of its extent to be invalid shall be deemed to
be in effect to the extent permitted by law.
 Section 9. Ratification. The City Clerk’s certification to the King
County Director of Records and Elections of the proposition referred to in
section 7 and any other acts taken after the passage of this ordinance and
consistent with its authority, are hereby ratified and confirmed.
 Section 10. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect and be
in force immediately upon its approval by the Mayor or, if not approved
and returned by the Mayor within ten (10) days after presentation, then on
the eleventh (11th) day after its presentation to the Mayor or, if vetoed by
the Mayor, then immediately after its passage over his veto.
Attachment A: Allocations for Subcategories and Projects
ATTACHMENT A
LEVY ALLOCATIONS FOR SUBCATEGORIES
AND PROJECTS
Levy Lid Lift Proceeds $145,500,000
Estimated Interest Earnings $ 498,000
TOTAL SOURCES OF FUNDS $145,998,000
TOTAL USES OF FUNDS
ACQUISITION
The Acquisition category includes acquisition of two types of properties
and is thus divided into two sub-categories: Neighborhood Park
Acquisition and Green Space Acquisition. Final allocations among
projects and budgetary appropriations for projects that do not show an
allocation below will be made by the City Council after considering any
recommendations that are made by the oversight committee established
in Section 5 of Ordinance 122749.
Neighborhood Park Acquisition: This subcategory includes the
acquisition of properties in areas that have been identified in the Parks
and Recreation 2006 Development Plan and Gap Analysis as being
deficient relative to the City’s comprehensive plan goals. It is
anticipated that the acquisition funding provided by the levy will be
supplemented by funding from other sources. However, funding may
still prove to be insufficient to complete acquisitions in all of the
locations listed below.
Allocation
12th Avenue Urban Center Village
Ballard Hub Urban Village
Belltown Urban Center Village
Bitter Lake Hub Urban Village
Capitol Hill Urban Center Village
Chinatown-International District Urban Center
Village
Commercial Core Urban Center Village
Denny Triangle Urban Center Village
First Hill Urban Center Village
Fremont Hub Urban Village
Greenwood-Phinney Ridge Residential Urban
Village
Lake City Urban Village
Morgan Junction Residential Urban Village
North Rainier Hub Urban Village
Ravenna Urban Center Village
University Urban Center Village
West Seattle Junction Hub Urban Village
Westwood-Highland Residential Urban Village
Wedgwood Neighborhood northeast of Dahl
Playfield
Beach Drive area northwest of Morgan Junction
Sub-Category Total $24,000,000
Green Space Acquisition: This subcategory includes acquisition of
properties to fill gaps in existing public ownership and preserve
The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority. 115
continuity within the City's designated green spaces. Acquisitions will
target critical properties in the following locations and in other
designated green spaces:
Allocation
Arroyos Natural Area
East Duwamish Greenbelt
Duwamish Head Greenbelt
Northeast Queen Anne Greenbelt
Ravenna Woods
Thornton Creek Watershed
West Duwamish Greenbelt
Sub-Category Total $6,000,000
INFLATION ADJUSTMENT FOR ACQUISITION
CATEGORY $5,697,000
TOTAL FOR ACQUISITION $35,697,000
DEVELOPMENT
The Development category includes five subcategories - development
or restoration of 1) Neighborhood Parks and Playgrounds, 2) Cultural
Facilities, 3) Playfields, 4) Major Neighborhood Parks, and 5) Trails.
Neighborhood Parks and Playgrounds: This subcategory includes
improvements to 23 neighborhood playgrounds to bring them up to
safety standards, development of parks on top of 4 water reservoir lids,
development of 4 skateparks and 3 spray parks, 2 off-leash areas, and
development of 11 specific neighborhood parks.
Allocation
Playground Renovations:
Improve and address safety issues at
playgrounds throughout the city.
Atlantic St. $350,000
Bayview $250,000
Beacon Hill $180,000
Bhy Kracke $150,000
Brighton $450,000
Fairmount $170,000
Gas Works $1,400,000
Golden Gardens $500,000
International District $500,000
John C. Little $300,000
Laurelhurst Playfield $400,000
Lawton $300,000
Maple Leaf $450,000
Matthews Beach $450,000
Montlake $550,000
Northacres $550,000
Rainier Playfield $600,000
Ross Playground $450,000
Roxhill Park $450,000
Sandel Playground $350,000
Seward Park $450,000
Volunteer Park $800,000
Woodland $350,000
Reservoir Park Development:
Develop parks on new reservoir lids and/or
acquire land to extend the reservoir parks
Attachment A (continued) Allocation
Maple Leaf Reservoir $5,000,000
West Seattle Reservoir $3,000,000
Myrtle Skatedot $250,000
Skatepark Development:
Develop new skateparks in accordance with
the Citywide Skatepark Plan recommendations
and priorities adopted by Resolution 30984.
Judkins Skatespot $600,000
Roxhill Skatespot $600,000
Spray Parks
Convert three wading pools to spray parks
Georgetown Wading Pool $400,000
Two additional wading pools $400,000
Off-Leash Areas
Provides development funds for an off-leash
area in each of the Magnolia and Queen Anne
neighborhoods at locations determined
through a Parks Department public
involvement process.
$140,000
Northgate Urban Center Park
Development of first phase of new park north
of Northgate Mall.
$2,500,000
Hing Hay Park
Renovation of existing park and development
of park on land acquired with 2000 parks and
open space levy funds.
$3,000,000
7th Elect Church Site
Development of park on land acquired with
2000 parks and open space levy funds.
$800,000
Crown Hill Elementary
Development of park on land that is expected
to be acquired from the Seattle School District.
$1,200,000
Cedar Park
Renovation of Cedar Park in northeast Seattle
on land acquired from the School District.
$500,000
Chinook Beach Park
Completion of Chinook Beach Park in the
Rainier Beach area - a south Lake Washington
site where juvenile Chinook salmon will rear.
$100,000
Marra-Desimone Park
Development of park, which includes the
Marra Farm, Seattle’s largest site for urban
gardening, in accordance with long-range
development plan.
$1,100,000
Camp Long
Renovation of kitchen and upgrade of other
aspects of this environmental learning center
facility.
$1,000,000
Othello Park
Safety and lighting improvement at Othello
Park.
$250,000
116 The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority.
Delridge Playfield
Renovate this lit sand field to provide synthetic
turf.
$3,200,000
Genesee Playfield #1
Renovate this lit sand field to provide synthetic
turf.
$2,100,000
Sub-Category Total $10,500,000
Major Neighborhood Parks: This subcategory includes the
following allocations to further develop major park sites and/or
destination park facilities in accord with master plans. The funds,
along with other leveraged funds, will accomplish the next phase of
development at these sites.
Allocation
Jefferson Park Development
Further implementation of Jefferson Park
Master Plan.
$5,000,000
Construct a district skate park facility at
Jefferson Park.
$1,000,000
Washington Park Arboretum Improvements
Further implementation of Arboretum Master
Plan including projects such as the Pacific
Connections Garden, trails, and other
improvements.
$2,500,000
Magnuson Park Improvements
Improvements to shoreline access and
development of a bicycle pathway to the 65th
Street entrance.
$500,000
Children’s Play Garden
Garden and play area being developed for
severely handicapped children. This funding
would create working garden portion of this
facility.
$950,000
Discovery Park
Restore Capehart site to green space including
slab and roadway demolition and removal,
grading and seeding.
$1,000,000
Sub-Category Total $10,950,000
Trails: This subcategory includes projects to develop and expand
Seattle’s urban trail system.
Allocation
Burke Gilman Trail
Complete Burke-Gilman Trail through
Ballard. This funding could cover 50% of the
cost, with the expectation that the remaining
funding would come from SDOT or other
sources.
$3,750,000
West Duwamish Trail Development
Create a linear park, including bicycle and
trail improvements along the Duwamish River
$2,000,000
Lake to Bay Trail (formerly Potlatch Trail)
Construct Thomas Street Overpass between Myrtle
Edwards Park and Queen Anne as first phase of
bicycle/pedestrian trail from Myrtle Edwards Park
to Lake Union.
$1,500,000
Sub-Category Total $7,250,000
INFLATION ADJUSTMENT FOR DEVELOPMENT
CATEGORY: $14,002,000
TOTAL FOR DEVELOPMENT: $87,292,000
Attachment A (continued)
Allocation
Queen Anne Boulevard Improvements
Continue improvements to this Department of
Parks and Recreation boulevard started with
2000 parks and open space levy funds.
$250,000
Victor Steinbrueck Park
Improvements to public safety including but
not limited to improving sight lines into the
park, renovating seating, renovating the
former children’s play area, improving and
expanding lighting, and upgrading
landscaping subject to the following:
(1) The Council determines whether the
project is needed after it has evaluated
how well the removal of the automated
public toilet, installation and operations
of surveillance cameras, and increased
policing address public safety issues in
and around the Park.
(2) If Council determines the project should
proceed, the Department of Parks and
Recreation will conduct a project design
process with broad public outreach and
submit a project design to the Council for
its review and approval prior to
appropriation of levy funds for
construction.
$1,600,000
Sub-Category Total $33,090,000
Citywide Parks Owned Cultural Facilities: This subcategory
includes the following allocations to provide critical safety and
operational improvements at city owned facilities.
Allocation
Seattle Asian Art Museum
Renovations to the Seattle Asian Art Museum
including seismic and HVAC upgrades to
allow continued use of the facility as a home
for the Museum at Volunteer Park. This
project will pay for approximately 40 percent
of the total anticipated costs of the
renovations.
$9,000,000
Langston Hughes Performing Arts Center
Seismic improvements to allow continued used
as a performing arts and cultural center.
$2,500,000
Sub-Category Total $11,500,000
Playfields: This subcategory includes restoration and renovation of
existing playfields. Fields to be improved are part of a citywide
system serving all of Seattle
Allocation
Lower Woodland Playfield #7
Renovate this lit sand field to provide synthetic
turf and more energy efficient lighting.
$2,800,000
Lower Woodland Playfield #2
Renovate this lit sand field to provide synthetic
turf.
$2,400,000
Delridge Playfield
Renovate this lit sand field to provide synthetic
turf.
$3,200,000
Genesee Playfield #1 $2,100,000
Delridge Playfield
Renovate this lit sand field to provide synthetic
turf.
$3,200,000
Genesee Playfield #1
Renovate this lit sand field to provide synthetic
turf.
$2,100,000
Sub-Category Total $10,500,000
Major Neighborhood Parks: This subcategory includes the
following allocations to further develop major park sites and/or
destination park facilities in accord with master plans. The funds,
along with other leveraged funds, will accomplish the next phase of
development at these sites.
Allocation
Jefferson Park Development
Further implementation of Jefferson Park
Master Plan.
$5,000,000
Construct a district skate park facility at
Jefferson Park.
$1,000,000
Washington Park Arboretum Improvements
Further implementation of Arboretum Master
Plan including projects such as the Pacific
Connections Garden, trails, and other
improvements.
$2,500,000
Magnuson Park Improvements
Improvements to shoreline access and
development of a bicycle pathway to the 65th
Street entrance.
$500,000
Children’s Play Garden
Garden and play area being developed for
severely handicapped children. This funding
would create working garden portion of this
facility.
$950,000
Discovery Park
Restore Capehart site to green space including
slab and roadway demolition and removal,
grading and seeding.
$1,000,000
Sub-Category Total $10,950,000
Trails: This subcategory includes projects to develop and expand
Seattle’s urban trail system.
Allocation
Burke Gilman Trail
Complete Burke-Gilman Trail through
Ballard. This funding could cover 50% of the
cost, with the expectation that the remaining
funding would come from SDOT or other
sources.
$3,750,000
West Duwamish Trail Development
Create a linear park, including bicycle and
trail improvements along the Duwamish River
$2,000,000
Lake to Bay Trail (formerly Potlatch Trail)
Construct Thomas Street Overpass between Myrtle
Edwards Park and Queen Anne as first phase of
bicycle/pedestrian trail from Myrtle Edwards Park
to Lake Union.
$1,500,000
Sub-Category Total $7,250,000
INFLATION ADJUSTMENT FOR DEVELOPMENT
CATEGORY: $14,002,000
TOTAL FOR DEVELOPMENT: $87,292,000
The above text is an exact reproduction of the text submitted by the sponsor. The Ethics and Elections Commission has no editorial authority. 117
ENVIRONMENT
The Environment category includes three sub-categories: Forest and
Stream Restoration; Community Food Gardens and P-Patches; and
Shoreline Access. Final allocations among projects and budgetary
appropriations for projects that do not show an allocation below will
be made by the City Council after considering any recommendations
that are made by the oversight committee established in Section 5 of
Ordinance_________.
Allocation
Forest and Stream Restoration – Green Seattle
Partnership
Fund work of the Green Seattle Partnership,
which allows the City to leverage the work of
the Cascade Land Conservancy to re-establish
healthy urban forests on city-owned property.
Potential project locations include: West
Duwamish Greenbelt; Longfellow Creek;
Ravenna Park; Burke Gilman Trial; and
Cheasty Greenspace.
$3,500,000
Forest and Stream Restoration – Kiwanis Ravine
Restore habitat in Kiwanis Ravine, which is
the location of a major heron rookery.
$600,000
Community Gardens
Fund the acquisition and development of new
Community Gardens or P-Patches and the
development of Community Gardens or PPatches on existing City-owned properties (an
anticipated four or more sites). The project
will focus on the following neighborhoods, but
may include others as opportunities arise:
Ballard, Queen Anne, Rainier Valley, and
West Seattle.
$2,000,000
Shoreline Access
Develop existing City-owned street-ends to provide
publicly accessible shoreline. Potential project
locations include: NE 135th Street; NE 130th
Street; 109/McGraw Street; 20th Avenue NW;
26/S. Fidalgo Street; 75th Avenue S.; 72nd Avenue
S.; SW Bronson Way; Spokane Street; and S.
Riverside Drive, but may include other sites as
well. It is anticipated that the shoreline access
funding provided by the levy will be supplemented
by funding from other sources. However, funding
may still prove to be insufficient to complete the
number of projects listed here.
$500,000
Sub-Category Total $6,600,000
INFLATION ADJUSTMENT FOR
ENVIRONMENT CATEGORY: $1,410,000
TOTAL FOR ENVIRONMENT CATEGORY $8,010,000
OPPORTUNITY FUND
The Opportunity Fund category provides funding to acquisition and
development projects identified by neighborhood and community
groups.
Attachment A (continued)
ENVIRONMENT
The Environment category includes three sub-categories: Forest and
Stream Restoration; Community Food Gardens and P-Patches; and
Shoreline Access. Final allocations among projects and budgetary
appropriations for projects that do not show an allocation below will
be made by the City Council after considering any recommendations
that are made by the oversight committee established in Section 5 of
Ordinance_________.
Allocation
Forest and Stream Restoration – Green Seattle
Partnership
Fund work of the Green Seattle Partnership,
which allows the City to leverage the work of
the Cascade Land Conservancy to re-establish
healthy urban forests on city-owned property.
Potential project locations include: West
Duwamish Greenbelt; Longfellow Creek;
Ravenna Park; Burke Gilman Trial; and
Cheasty Greenspace.
$3,500,000
Forest and Stream Restoration – Kiwanis Ravine
Restore habitat in Kiwanis Ravine, which is
the location of a major heron rookery.
$600,000
Community Gardens
Fund the acquisition and development of new
Community Gardens or P-Patches and the
development of Community Gardens or PPatches on existing City-owned properties (an
anticipated four or more sites). The project
will focus on the following neighborhoods, but
may include others as opportunities arise:
Ballard, Queen Anne, Rainier Valley, and
West Seattle.
$2,000,000
Shoreline Access
Develop existing City-owned street-ends to provide
publicly accessible shoreline. Potential project
locations include: NE 135th Street; NE 130th
Street; 109/McGraw Street; 20th Avenue NW;
26/S. Fidalgo Street; 75th Avenue S.; 72nd Avenue
S.; SW Bronson Way; Spokane Street; and S.
Riverside Drive, but may include other sites as
well. It is anticipated that the shoreline access
funding provided by the levy will be supplemented
by funding from other sources. However, funding
may still prove to be insufficient to complete the
number of projects listed here.
$500,000
Sub-Category Total $6,600,000
INFLATION ADJUSTMENT FOR
ENVIRONMENT CATEGORY: $1,410,000
TOTAL FOR ENVIRONMENT CATEGORY $8,010,000
OPPORTUNITY FUND
The Opportunity Fund category provides funding to acquisition and
development projects identified by neighborhood and community
groups.
The Opportunity Fund category provides funding to acquisition and
development projects identified by neighborhood and community
groups.
TOTAL FOR OPPORTUNITY FUND: $15,000,000
TOTAL USES OF FUNDS $145,998,000
Working on a Candidate or Ballot Issue Campaign
If you are interested in working on a City candidate or ballot issue campaign, please call us or
visit our web site www.seattle.gov/elections for campaign contact information.
 Making Campaign Contributions
The following City and State regulations apply to campaign contributions for City candidate and
City ballot issue committees:
 • Committees must report the receipt of both monetary and in-kind contributions.
 • Candidate committees have a contribution limit of $700 per contributor per election
cycle. Ballot issue committees do not have contribution limits except during the final
 21 days before the election, when they may not accept contributions of greater than
 $5,000 from any one contributor.
 • Individuals who contribute more than $100 to a committee are required to disclose the
 name, city and state of their employer, and their occupation.
 • Committees may not accept cash contributions of more than $60. Contributions of
 more than $60 in the aggregate must be made by check, money order, or credit card.
Contact Information
Polly Grow, Compliance Auditor
Seattle Ethics and Elections Commission
(206) 615-1248
polly.grow@seattle.gov
City of Seattle
118
119
Seattle’s Form of Government
Seattle is a Charter City with a Mayor-Council form of government. The Mayor is directly elected by the voters,
as are the nine City Councilmembers, all of whom are elected at-large. The other elected position is the City Attorney, who is also elected at-large. The regular term of all offices is four years.
Candidates for these offices must be U.S. Citizens, registered voters in the City of Seattle at the time they file their
declaration of candidacy, and able to read and write the English language.
All City office elections are non-partisan, which means the top two vote-getters in the primary election are placed
on the general election ballot. This is true regardless of whether or not one candidate receives a majority of the
primary vote. If fewer than three candidates file declarations of candidacy for any of these offices, that office does
not appear on the primary election ballot, but does appear on the general election ballot. In non-partisan elections, parties do not nominate candidates to appear on the ballot and the ballots do not identify the candidates by
party. Parties can and do endorse and support certain candidates, but play no other role in nominating candidates
or determining who is placed on the primary or general election ballot.
The following table lists each office and the year in which that office is next scheduled to appear on the ballot.
Mayor 2009
City Attorney 2009
Council Position 1 2011
Council Position 2 2009
Council Position 3 2011
Council Position 4 2009
Council Position 5 2011
Council Position 6 2009
Council Position 7 2011
Council Position 8 2009
Council Position 9 2011
For additional information about City government go to www.seattle.gov
City of Seattle

Visit www.kingcounty.gov/elections/chinese.aspx
for more information.
As required by Section 203 of the federal Voting Rights
Act, King County produces all election materials in
both English and Chinese.
In addition to providing translated materials, King
County employs a full-time Chinese translation staff as
well as bilingual poll workers to assist voters.
Federal law requires counties to provide language
assistance if more than 5 percent of voting age
citizens in a jurisdiction are members of a singlelanguage minority group who do not “speak or
understand English adequately enough to participate
in the electoral process.”
King County’s compliance with Section 203 of the
Voting Rights Act has achieved great success since
the county first implemented this federally mandated
program in 2002, following the 2000 census. Since
2002, King County has worked closely with a
community coalition to assist voters.
If you need language
assistance or would
like a ballot and voters’
pamphlet in Chinese,
call 206-296-8683.
For questions, please call 206-296-8683.
120
Chinese
language assistance
For questions, please call 206-296-8683. 121
Your voter guide:
know before you vote
Your voter guide is an online tool voters can
use to confi rm their registration and fi nd their
polling place, along with comprehensive
information about candidates and ballot
measures.
Over the past four years, King County has
focused on making every aspect of the
elections process more accessible to all
voters. As a result, many polling places that
were under utilized or not accessible to
voters with disabilities were consolidated or
closed.
Before you go to vote
on November 4, confi rm
the location of your
assigned polling place at
kingcounty.gov/elections. 
A new way to return
your absentee ballot
King County offers ten ballot drop boxes throughout the county to provide absentee voters with
another way to securely return their ballots without the cost of postage in the 18 days leading up
to and including the November 4 General Election.
Ballot drop box locations:
•	 Bellevue. Library Connection @ Crossroads, 15600 NE 8th St., Suite K-11
•	 Black Diamond. Black Diamond Library, 24707 Roberts Dr.
•	 Des Moines. Des Moines Library, 21620 11th Ave. S
•	 Fall City. Fall City Library, 33415 SE 42 Pl.
•	 Lake Forest Park. Lake Forest Park Library, 17171 Bothell Way NE, lower level, south
•	 Pacific. Algona-Pacific Library, 255 Ellingson Rd.
•	 Renton. King County Elections, 919 SW Grady Way
•	 Seattle.
	 •	 Delridge Neighborhood Service Center, 5405 Delridge Way SW
	 •	 Northeast Seattle Neighborhood Service Center, 4534 University Way NE
	 •	 King County Administration Building, 500 Fourth Ave.
Whether you mail your ballot, use a drop box, or
return your absentee ballot to a neighborhood
polling place, remember to vote on Tuesday,
November 4, 2008.
Drop boxes will be open to accept
ballots starting Friday, October 17, and
will remain open until 8 p.m. on	
November 4, Election Day.
For questions, please call 206-296-8683. 122
For questions, please call 206-296-8683.
123
Vote by mail
Beginning in February 2009, King County will conduct all elections by mail and all registered
King County voters will receive and cast their ballots by mail. Voting by mail is already the
preferred method of voting for most people, with about 70 percent of ballots cast through
the mail in every election. Resources will be more efficiently used to support a single system
for voting, training, processing, and counting. Vote by mail is easy, accurate, and accessible to
everyone.
For the majority of voters who already vote by
mail via absentee ballot, nothing will change.
About three weeks prior to each election
all registered voters will be mailed a ballot,
which they must return to a drop box or have
postmarked by Election Day.
Voters will have plenty of time to become
informed about the issues and candidates,
consider each vote in the relaxed comfort
of their home, and securely return their
ballot through the U.S. Postal Service or at a
secured, 24-hour ballot drop box.
Voters with disabilities will be able to cast
an independent and private ballot using an
accessible voting unit at one of three regional
voting centers located in Bellevue, Renton
and Seattle.
Never miss an election.
For questions, please call 206-296-8683. 124
King County is committed to making this new system work for all voters, so that everyone
can participate in one of the greatest rights of democracy—the right to vote.
Voting by mail is secure. Before the ballot is counted, the signature on every ballot
envelope is checked and confirmed with the voter’s registration file.
Voters will be able to verify that their ballot packet was received by King County Elections,
and then be able to track its progress online as it is processed.
Simple. Secure. Proven successful.
One system for all,
beginning February 2009
Get ready today.
Prepare for the transition to vote by mail now by doing the following:
Update your address. Make sure your home and mailing addresses are
current so the correct ballot reaches you. If you’ve moved, call us.
Update your signature. If you think your signature has changed since you
first registered, fill out a new voter registration form, available at www.
kingcounty.gov/elections.
Make it count. Ballots must be postmarked by Election Day to be counted.
Learn more. Visit www.kingcounty.gov/elections or call 206-296-VOTE (8683).
For questions, please call 206-296-8683. 125
Visiting
King County Elections
King County Elections is currently located
at 919 SW Grady Way in Renton, located on
Metro bus route 140.
Election headquarters was created to
increase ballot security and give the public
the opportunity to observe ballot processing
from start to fi nish.
This building is open to the public during
business hours and group tours are available.
Contact Elections for more information.
King	County	Elections	is	open	
Monday	through	Friday,	from	
8:30	a.m.	to	4:30	p.m.
Special	voter	registration	hours	
will	be	held	on	Saturday,	Oct.	18,	
from	9	a.m.	to	3	p.m.		
The	offi		ce	will	remain	open	until	
6	p.m.	on	Monday,	Oct.	20.	
167
405
SW Grady Way
Powell Ave SW
Lind Ave SW Lind Ave SW
E Valley Rd
VALLEY FWY
SW 16th St SW 16th St
126
Each of King County’s 392 polling places offers an accessible voting unit, with an audio and
touch-screen ballot in both English and Chinese on Election Day. With large-font and highcontrast options along with tactile devices, voting is made easy for voters with a wide range of
disabilities. All voters are welcome to vote using an accessible voting unit.
Early, in-person voting on an accessible voting unit is available weekdays, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
starting Oct. 15 through Nov. 3. Accessible voting is available on Election Day, Nov. 4, from
7 a.m. to 8 p.m. at the King County Elections office in Renton and at all polling places.
Accessible voting
for everyone
How to vote an
accessible ballot:
1. Check in with your poll worker and ask to
vote using the accessible voting unit.
2. Choose the type of ballot you prefer:
touch-screen ballot or audio ballot
3. The poll worker will issue you an encoded
card with the correct ballot style for your
precinct. The card does not store personal
information and is cleared after each use.
4. To begin voting, insert your card into the card reader at the top right of the machine.
Choose your language and follow the instructions to proceed.
5. To mark your ballot selections, touch the box next to your ballot choice on the screen.
Simply touch the box again to de-select your choice.
6. After you’ve finished marking your selections, review the ballot summary screen and verify
the paper copy of your ballot printout. To make changes, simply touch “reject ballot” and
change your ballot selection. To submit your completed ballot, touch “cast ballot.”
7. To cast an audio ballot, use the numeric keypad to vote. An audio summary will verify your
choices and allow you to make changes.
For questions, please call 206-296-8683.
For questions, please call 206-296-8683. 127
How to vote
your ballot
Use	a	blue	or	black	pen	to	vote	
your ballot.
Pencil can not be read by our
equipment.
If you sign your ballot, it cannot be
counted. (RCW 29A.60.040)
The choice to vote or not vote on any race
is yours.
Do not vote for more than one choice in
any race. This is considered an overvote.
Overvoted races are not counted.
Instructions to all voters
Use a dark pen to fi ll in the oval next to
your choice. Fill in the oval completely.
If you make an error in voting, draw
a line through the entire candidate’s
name. You then have the option of
making another choice.
If you make an error in voting, ask a
poll worker for a new ballot.
Do not sign or make any additional
marks on the ballot.
Do not cut, tear or damage this ballot.
Write-in votes:
To vote for a write-in candidate, write
the name and darken the oval.
Absentee voters
Poll voters
Optional
write-in
 Jane Doe
128
Register to Vote www.vote.wa.gov
Choose one of these easy options:
Say what?
Be smart.
[Know your election terms.]
Primary
A process by which a pool of candidates for public
o ce is reduced to the top contenders. In Washington
State, the statewide Primary occurs on the third
Tuesday of August.
Top 2 Primary
A type of Primary in which the two candidates who
receive the most votes in a race advance to the General
Election, regardless of the candidates’ stated party
preferences.  is primary system has been used in
nonpartisan races by local governments in Washington
State, but August 19, 2008 was the state’s  rst time using
the Top 2 Primary in partisan races.
Candidate
Any voter registered in Washington State may run as a
candidate for public o ce. Each candidate for partisan
o ce may state a political party that he or she prefers.
Party preference
A candidate’s stated preference does not imply that
the candidate is nominated or endorsed by the party,
or that the party approves of or associates with that
candidate.
Nominee
A candidate who has been chosen to represent a
party. Nominees will not be di erentiated from other
candidates on the ballot.
Endorsement
A public declaration of support for a candidate.
Partisan o ce
A public o ce for which a candidate may
state a preference for a political party and
have that preference listed on the ballot.
General Election
 e General Election determines which
remaining candidates will be voted into
o ce. In the United States, Election Day is
the  rst Tuesday a er the  rst Monday of
November.  e next General Election will be
November 4, 2008.
Online
Go to www.vote.wa.gov to register online up
to 30 days before an election. It’s fast, easy and
secure. All you need is a Washington State ID
or driver’s license.
By Mail
Forms are available to download and print on
the Internet at www.vote.wa.gov or at your
county elections department, public libraries,
schools, and other government o ces. Mail
your form at least 30 days before an election.
In Person
If you are a new voter in Washington State,
you may register in person up to 15 days
before an election at your county elections
department. Contact information for your
county elections department is located in the
back of this pamphlet.
129
The Magic Number =
270
A candidate must win 270 of the 538 total electoral votes
to become President. If no candidate receives a majority of
electoral votes, the U.S. House of Representatives elects the
President and the U.S. Senate elects the Vice President.
When you vote for President, you’re also choosing a slate of
electors to represent Washington State in the Electoral College.
Typically, electors are citizens nominated in recognition of service
and dedication to their political party. The U.S. Constitution
stipulates that an elector cannot be a “person holding an offi ce of
trust under the United States.”
Washington State is one of 48 states that use a “winner-take-all”
system; the candidate who wins the most popular votes in the state
will get all of Washington’s electoral votes.
Washington State has 11 electoral votes. Electoral votes are
allocated based on the 2000 Census.
Washington State & the Electoral College
The Electoral College is administered by the National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA). You can learn more at www.archives.gov .
Electoral College
The Electoral College
was established by
the Founding Fathers
as a compromise
between election of the
President by Congress
and election by popular
vote. 
130
Take a look at these Washington State election trends.
Be a part of the picture... vote!
Get thePicture
Vote by Mail
in Washington State
Statistics provided by the Offi ce of the Secretary of State.
Year Wash. Voter
Turnout
Winner of Washington State’s
Presidential Election
1956 80.2% Eisenhower*
1960 82.4% Nixon
1964 80.7% Johnson*
1968 79.5% Humphrey
1972 77.0% Nixon*
1976 76.7% Ford
1980 77.0% Reagan*
1984 78.6% Reagan*
1988 76.9% Dukakis
1992 82.6% Clinton*
1996 74.5% Clinton*
2000 75.5% Gore
2004 82.2% Kerry
* Winner of the U.S. Presidential Election
Washington’s Presidential Elections
Event Year # of Registered Voters
Ages 18-24
Turnout Among
Registered Voters Ages 18-24
General Election 2000 325,237 48.1%
General Election 2004 363,660 67.1%
General Election 2008 Youth voters make a difference.
You can help make history in 2008.
Washington Youth Voter Trends
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
90.00%
100.00%
1992 1996 2000 2004 2005 2006 2007
Percentage Using
Vote by Mail
Registered Voters Ages 18-24
131
County
Elections
Department City ZIP
mailing
 address
These numbers require
special telephone
equipment to operate.
tdd/TTY service
onLY
for the speech or
hearing impaired.
➢ Attention speech or hearing impaired Telecommunications Device for the Deaf users: If you are using an “800 number”
from the list above for TDD/TTY service, you must be prepared to give the relay service operator the telephone number for your
county elections department.
(
telephone
number
County Elections Department Information
 Printed on recycled paper.
Please recycle this Voters’ Pamphlet!
Adams 210 W Broadway, Ste 200 Ritzville 99169 (509) 659-3249 (509) 659-1122
Asotin PO Box 129 Asotin 99402 (509) 243-2084 (800) 855-1155
Benton PO Box 470 Prosser 99350 (509) 736-3085 (800) 833-6388
Chelan PO Box 400 Wenatchee 98807 (509) 667-6808 (800) 833-6388
Clallam 223 E Fourth St, Ste 1 Port Angeles 98362 (360) 417-2221 (800) 833-6388
 Toll-free (866) 433-VOTE
Clark PO Box 8815 Vancouver 98666-8815 (360) 397-2345 (800) 223-3131
Columbia 341 E Main St Dayton 99328-1361 (509) 382-4541 (800) 833-6388
Cowlitz 207 N Fourth Ave, Rm 107 Kelso 98626 (360) 577-3005 (360) 577-3061
Douglas 213 S Rainier St, PO Box 456 Waterville 98858 (509) 745-8527 (509) 745-8527, Ext 207
Ferry 350 E Delaware Ave #2 Republic 99166 (509) 775-5200 (800) 833-6388
Franklin PO Box 1451 Pasco 99301 (509) 545-3538 (800) 833-6388
Garfield	 PO Box 278	 Pomeroy	 99347	 (509) 843-1411	 (800) 833-6388
Grant PO Box 37 Ephrata 98823 (509) 754-2011 Ext 343 (800) 833-6388
Grays Harbor 100 W Broadway, Ste 2 Montesano 98563 (360) 249-4232 (360) 249-6575
Island PO Box 1410 Coupeville 98239 (360) 679-7366 (360) 679-7305
Jefferson PO Box 563 Port Townsend 98368 (360) 385-9119 (800) 833-6388
King 919 SW Grady Way Renton 98057 (206) 296-8683 (206) 296-0109
Kitsap 614 Division St Port Orchard 98366 (360) 337-7128 (800) 833-6388
Kittitas 205 W FifthAve, Ste 105 Ellensburg 98926 (509) 962-7503 (800) 833-6388
Klickitat 205 S Columbus Ave, Stop 2 Goldendale 98620 (509) 773-4001 (800) 833-6388
Lewis PO Box 29 Chehalis 98532-0029 (360) 740-1278 (360) 740-1480
Lincoln PO Box 28 Davenport 99122 (509) 725-4971 (800) 833-6388
Mason PO Box 400 Shelton 98584 (360) 427-9670 Ext 470 (800) 833-6388
Okanogan PO Box 1010 Okanogan 98840 (509) 422-7240 (800) 833-6388
Pacific	 PO Box 97	 South Bend	 98586-0097	 (360) 875-9317	 (360) 875-9400
Pend Oreille PO Box 5015 Newport 99156 (509) 447-6472 (509) 447-3186
Pierce 2501 S 35th St, Ste C Tacoma 98409 (253) 798-VOTE (8683) (800) 833-6388
San Juan PO Box 638 Friday Harbor 98250 (360) 378-3357 (360) 378-4151
Skagit 700 S Second St/PO Box 1306 Mount Vernon 98273 (360) 336-9305 (360) 336-9332
Skamania PO Box 790 Stevenson 98648 (509) 427-3730 (800) 833-6388
Snohomish 3000 Rockefeller Ave Everett 98201 (425) 388-3444 (425) 388-3700
MS 505
Spokane 1033 W Gardner Ave Spokane 99260 (509) 477-2320 (509) 477-2333
Stevens 215 S Oak St, Rm 106 Colville 99114 (509) 684-7514 (800) 833-6384
Toll-free (866) 307-9060
Thurston 2000 Lakeridge Dr SW Olympia 98502 (360) 786-5408 (360) 754-2933
Wahkiakum PO Box 543 Cathlamet 98612 (360) 795-3219 (800) 833-6388
Walla Walla PO Box 1856/315 W Main St Walla Walla 99362 (509) 524-2530 (800) 833-6388
Whatcom 311 Grand Ave, Ste 103 Bellingham 98225 (360) 676-6742 (360) 738-4555
Whitman N 400 Main St Colfax 99111 (509) 648-6353 (800) 833-6388
Yakima 128 N Second St, Rm 117 Yakima 98901 (509) 574-1340 (800) 833-6388
132
✁
Absentee Ballot Application
If you have requested an absentee ballot or have a permanent request for an absentee ballot on file, please do not submit another application.
To be filled out by applicant. Please print in ink.
Registered Name:
Street Address:
City: ZIP:
Telephone: (Day) (Evening)
For identification purposes only (optional): Voter registration number, if known:
I hereby declare that I am a registered voter.
Send my ballot to the following address (if different from above):
Mailing Address:
City: State:
ZIP: Country:
Signature ✍
To be valid, your signature must be included.
Date
- Mail this
absentee ballot
request form to your
county elections department.
See previous page for
your county’s mailing
address.
This application is for:
General Election only
November 4, 2008 r
Permanent Request
All future elections r
For office use only
Precinct Code:
Levy Code:
Ballot Code:
Ballot Mailed:
Birth Date: Have you recently registered to vote? Yes ❐ No ❐
Many of Washington’s counties now conduct all elections by mail. If you are a registered voter in a
county that votes by mail, you will automatically be sent a ballot. King and Pierce counties continue
to use poll sites in addition to mail to conduct elections.
Voter Participation in Presidential Election Campaigns
Those who wish to participate in the presidential election campaign process may contact the candidate or party of his or her choice
for more information. Listed below are the political parties with candidates for president on the general election ballot.
Washington State Democratic Central
Committee
615 Second Avenue, Ste 580
Seattle, WA 98194
(206) 583-0664
info@wa-democrats.org
www.wa-democrats.org
Washington State Republican Party
2840 Northup Way, Ste 140
Bellevue, WA 98004
(425) 460-0570
comments@wsrp.org
www.wsrp.org
Party for Socialism & Liberation
1122 E Pike #1289
Seattle, WA 98122
(206) 367-3820
seattle@votepsl.org
pslweb.org
Socialist Workers Party
5418 Rainier Avenue S
Seattle, WA 98118
(206) 323-1755
seattleswp@speakeasy.net
themilitant.com
Libertarian Party of Washington State
10522 Lake City Way NE, Ste C103
Seattle, WA 98125
(206) 571-1946
	 officemanager@lpwa.org
www.lpwa.org/voter
Constitution Party of Washington
10605 SE 240th Street, PMB 135
Kent, WA 98031
(253) 854-6524
contactus@constitutionpartyofwa.com
www.constitutionpartyofwa.com
Green Party of Washington State
	 GPoWS State Office
PO Box 70515
Seattle, WA 98127
(360) 875-0205 or (206) 781-3848
wagreens@gmail.com
www.wagreens.us
 