Pierce County Pierce County
Official Local Official Local
Voters' Pamphlet Voters' Pamphlet
Look for
your ballot
July 16 - 19
Primary Election
August 2, 2016
Powerful Citizen App
Free Download
No more frustrating internet searches. We’ve
put everything in the palm of your hand . . .
Civic Pierce County is a mobile app that
displays your personalized civic information:
The elected offi cials that represent you (and
how to contact them), your fi re and school
districts, fi nd your closest ballot drop box,
status of your ballot, elected offi ces you can
run for, and elections Q & A.
Your guide to Federal, State, and
Pierce County candidates. 
2
Message from the Auditor Message from the Auditor
Dear Pierce County Voter -
This is how I think of an election.
The purpose of an election is to allow the community to have a conversation. “Where do we want to go?”
“What are our values?” “How much should we spend?” “How do we defi ne quality of life?”
Election workers hold that conversation together. I call it “holding the space.” That means we don’t judge
voters or candidates, make them feel inadequate, or try to impact the conversation’s outcome. We simply
offer access and support, and promote transparency and equality.
We hold the space so that every voice can be heard, even when the conversation occasionally degrades
into an uncivil shouting match.
Our Challenge
This year has been – and continues to be – incredibly challenging. Blood is running high and hot. There’s
a lot of shouting, not much listening.
In addition, we have some signifi cant logistical challenges.
Of the six elections being conducted in 2016, three of them overlap. As I write this note, we are certifying May’s unusual, controversial Presidential Primary (the nominating process for the Republican Party’s
national convention). Simultaneously, we are proofi ng and printing ballots for the August Primary which
features 284 candidates for 98 offi ces. Also, the Pierce County Charter Review Commission, which convenes only once every 10 years, will offer amendments to Pierce County’s Charter (our constitution) in
November. And fi nally, we anticipate that November’s general election will be the largest in Washington
State’s history.
Our Hope
On behalf of Pierce County’s election professionals, we hope you’ll be patient, thoughtful participants in
2016.
The Primary will be a crowded ballot with many offi ces, candidates, and issues. It's okay if you don't vote
for every item on the ballot. Vote for the offi ces and issues that are important to you. Rest assured your
votes will be counted.
Please participate in your community’s conversation. We’re holding the space for you.
Julie Anderson
253-798-3189
Julie.Anderson@co.pierce.wa.us
3
This pamphlet contains all races and issues that are on the ballot for this election. Your ballot will contain only the
races and issues that you are eligible to vote on. See page 8 to learn how to determine which district you reside in.
What's Inside
Complete text of each district resolution is
available for public inspection at
PierceCountyElections.org
Ballot Drop Boxes - Postage Free ...............................4 - 5
Voting Centers ................................................................. 6
Not registered to vote? ..................................................... 7
Who donates to campaigns? ........................................... 7
What can you vote on? ..................................................... 8
What is a Top 2 Primary? .................................................. 9
Descriptions of Offi ces in the Primary .......................... 99
What is a Precinct Committee Offi cer? ........................113
_____________________________________________________
Federal Offices
U.S. Senator ............................................................. 10 - 26
U.S. Representative, 6th Congressional District ...27 - 32
U.S. Representative, 8th Congressional District....33 - 38
U.S. Representative, 9th Congressional District ...39 - 43
U.S. Representative, 10th Congressional District.. 44 - 47
_____________________________________________________
State Candidates
Governor ..................................................................48 - 58
Lieutenant Governor ...............................................59 - 64
Secretary of State ...............................................65 - 66
State Treasurer .........................................................67 - 69
State Auditor ............................................................70 - 72
Attorney General ............................................................ 73
Commissioner of Public Lands ............................... 74 - 77
Superintentent of Public Instruction ......................78 - 82
Insurance Commissioner ........................................83 - 84
_____________________________________________________
Legislative Candidates
2nd Legislative District ............................................85 - 89
25th Legislative District ...........................................90 - 92
26th Legislative District ...........................................93 - 95
27th Legislative District............................................96 - 98
28th Legislative District........................................100 - 104
29th Legislative District........................................105 - 107
30th Legislative District........................................108 - 109
31st Legislative District........................................110 - 112
Pierce County Candidates
Executive ............................................................... 114 - 115
Council District No. 2 ............................................116 - 117
Council District No. 3 .....................................................118
Council District No. 4 .....................................................119
Council District No. 6 ........................................... 120 - 121
____________________________________________
Judicial Candidates
State Supreme Court, Pos. 5 ............................... 122 - 123
Pierce County Superior Court, Dept. 8 ............... 123 - 124
Pierce County Superior Court, Dept. 17 ............. 125 - 126
____________________________________________
Cities and Towns
City of Buckley............................................................... 127
Town of Eatonville ........................................................ 128
____________________________________________
Fire Districts
Fire Protection District No. 6 - Prop. 1 ......................... 129
Fire Protection District No. 6 - Prop. 2 ......................... 130
Fire Protection District No. 13 ...................................... 131
Fire Protection District No. 14 ...................................... 132
Fire Protection District No. 16 ...................................... 133
Fire Protection District No. 17 ...................................... 134
Fire Protection District No. 21 ...................................... 135
Do you wish you could meet the candidate before you vote?
Look for the QR code at the bottom of the candidate’s statement.
Scan the code with your smartphone giving you a face to face with the
candidate!
Video Voters' Guide
4
Open 24-hours from July 18 through August 2. Closed promptly at 8 pm on August 2.
Anderson Island
Anderson Island Park and Ride
Yoman Rd (near Villa Beach Rd)
Anderson Island, WA 98303
Bonney Lake
Bonney Lake (South)
Park and Ride
Sky Island Dr E & 184th Ave E
Bonney Lake, WA 98391
Browns Point/
Northeast Tacoma
NE Police Substation
4731 Norpoint Way NE
Tacoma, WA 98422
DuPont
DuPont Ross Plaza
1500 Wilmington Dr
DuPont, WA 98327
Eatonville
Barney's Corner
40512 Meridian E
Eatonville, WA 98328
Edgewood
Edgewood City Hall
2224 104th Ave E
Edgewood, WA 98372
Fife
Fife City Hall
5411 23rd St E
Fife, WA 98424
Gig Harbor/Key Peninsula
Gig Harbor Fire Station
6711 Kimball Dr
Gig Harbor, WA 98335
Key Center Fire Station
8911 Key Peninsula Hwy, KPN
Lakebay, WA 98349
Pt. Fosdick Safeway
4811 Pt. Fosdick Dr NW
Gig Harbor, WA 98335
Purdy Fire Station
5210 144th St NW
Gig Harbor, WA 98332
Graham
Graham Fire & Rescue
Station 91
10012 187th St E
Puyallup, WA 98375
Lakewood
Lakewood City Hall
6000 Main St SW
Lakewood, WA 98499
Lakewood (SR 512)
Park and Ride
10417 South Tacoma Way
Lakewood, WA 98499
All drop boxes close at 8:00 p.m. on August 2, 2016.
Maps, directions, and photos are available online: PierceCountyElections.org
Ballot Drop Boxes - No Stamp Required
West Pierce Fire & Rescue
3631 Drexler Dr W
University Place, WA 98466
5
Orting
Orting Public Safety Building
401 Washington Ave SE
Orting, WA 98360
Parkland/Spanaway
Parkland/Spanaway Library
13718 Pacifi c Ave S
Tacoma, WA 98444
Roy Y Park and Ride
SR 507 and Pacifi c Ave S
Spanaway, WA 98387
Puyallup/South Hill
Puyallup Library
324 South Meridian
Puyallup, WA 98371
South Hill Library
15420 Meridian E
Puyallup, WA 98375
Roy
Roy City Hall
216 McNaught Rd S
Roy, WA 98580
Steilacoom
Steilacoom Library
2950 Steilacoom Blvd
Steilacoom, WA 98388
Sumner
Sumner Library
1116 Fryer Ave
Sumner, WA 98390
Tacoma
72nd Street Transit Center
1319 E 72nd St
Tacoma, WA 98404
Central District
902 S L St
Tacoma, WA 98405
Community Health Care
at Salishan
1708 E 44th St
Tacoma, WA 98404
Kandle Park Police Substation
(parking lot)
5140 N 26th St
Tacoma, WA 98407
Pierce County Annex
2401 S 35th St
Tacoma, WA 98409
Tacoma Area Coalition of
Individuals with Disabilities
6315 S 19th St
Tacoma, WA 98466
Tacoma Dome Park and Ride
610 Puyallup Ave E
Tacoma, WA 98421
University Place
West Pierce Fire & Rescue
3631 Drexler Dr W
University Place, WA 98466
Ballot Drop Boxes - No Stamp Required
Open 24-hours from July 18 through August 2. Closed promptly at 8 pm on August 2.
All drop boxes close at 8:00 p.m. on August 2, 2016.
Maps, directions, and photos are available online: PierceCountyElections.org
New!
Community
Health Care
at Salishan
1708 E 44th St
Tacoma, WA 98404
New!
6
Return your ballot early!
Additional assistance:
Center for Independence
(253) 582-1253 (voice)
(800) 724-8172
Hearing, Speech & Deafness Center
(253) 475-0782 (voice)
(253) 474-1748 (TTY)
(253) 292-2209 (videophone)
Tacoma Area Coalition of
Individuals with Disabilities
(253) 565-9000 (voice)
711 (TTY)
Clover Park
Technical College
Rotunda - Bldg 3
4500 Steilacoom Blvd SW
Lakewood, WA 98499
Gig Harbor Civic Center
3510 Grandview St
Gig Harbor, WA 98335
Pierce County
Election Center
2501 S 35th St, Suite C
Tacoma, WA 98409
Pierce County
Maintenance Facility
4812 196th St E
Spanaway, WA 98387
Puyallup Library
324 South Meridian
Puyallup, WA 98371
Tacoma Area Coalition
of Individuals with
Disabilities (TACID)
6315 S 19th St
Tacoma, WA 98466
Services available:
• Accessible voting using
touch screen equipment.
• Provisional ballots.
• Voting assistance from
staff.
• Voter registration.
• Ballot drop off.
Drop by 8 p.m. August 2 Mail by July 29
Voting Centers: Open August 2, 2016 7 a.m. - 8 p.m.
To vote on a touch screen,
bring photo ID and don't
return your ballot.
7
Not registered to vote? Registering to Vote
For a list of the people and organizations that donated to state and local candidates and
ballot measure campaigns, visit www.pdc.wa.gov.
Public Disclosure Commission
www.pdc.wa.gov
Toll Free (877) 601-2828
To register to vote, you must be:
• A citizen of the United States.
• A legal resident of Washington state.
• At least 18 years old by Election Day.
• Not under the authority of the Department of Corrections.


How to register:
• Online - PierceCountyElections.org
• By mail - Call us at (253) 798-VOTE and we
will mail you a form.
• In person - Pierce County Election Center,
2501 S 35th St, Suite C, Tacoma, WA 98409,
Monday - Friday 8:30 a.m. - 4:30 p.m.
Deadlines:
• Online or mail deadline is July 4, 2016.
• In person deadline (new Washington voters
only) is July 25, 2016.
Who donates to campaigns?
8
What can you vote on?
3. Visit our website and check Info By Address at PierceCountyElections.org

2. Download the Civic Pierce County App
4. Helpful Staff pcelections@co.pierce.wa.us
 253-798-VOTE (8683) or 800-446-4979


1. Review your voter registration card to identify your voting districts
  ! $
    
  !  $ 
  #  # 
*)336:=133*-4)13-,:6>6;-)+0-3-+:165
 1-8+-6;5:> ')9015/:65 &6:-8"-/19:8):165)8,

 	
 &
    #
"
 !   
!##(%!
!#&"$
$&	
12/11/1960
29-555
0036
WA005555
SCOTT ALAN
11023 12TH ST S
TACOMA WA 98407-1199
• Check your registration status.
• View your sample ballot.
• Find your nearest drop box or voting center.
• Find out if we've received your ballot.
• Under Voter Resources, click Info By Address.
• Enter your address to fi nd your district
information, elected offi cials, and more.
9
Top 2 Primary
What is a Top 2 Primary?
• Voters do not have to declare a party affi liation to vote in the primary.
• The Washington Top 2 Primary allows voters to choose among all candidates running for
 each offi ce.
• Candidates for partisan offi ce may state a preference for a political party, which is listed on
 the ballot.
• The two candidates receiving the most votes in the Primary Election qualify for the General
 Election.
• Candidates must also receive at least 1% of the votes cast in that race to advance to the
 General Election.
What does the candidate’s “party preference” mean in a Top 2 Primary?
• Each candidate for partisan offi ce may state a political party that he or she prefers.
• A candidate’s preference does not imply that the candidate is nominated or endorsed by
 the party, or that the party approves of or associates with that candidate.
How did the Top 2 Primary become law?
• The Top 2 Primary was passed by the people in 2004 as an initiative. I-872 passed by
 almost 60%.
• This system was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in March 2008 and used for the fi rst
 time in the 2008 primary.
• It has been in effect for all partisan elections since 2008.
Could a race in the General Election include two candidates who prefer the same party?
• Yes. The candidates in each race who advance to the General Election will be the two who
 receive the most votes in the Primary.
• Both candidates who advance to the General Election could prefer the same party.
10 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Philip L. Cornell
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Elected Experience: I have been involved in several political campaigns in the last few years in an effort to advocate
for my community. A mayoral race, A county commissioner race and a children's safety advocacy ballot issue. I
ran for PCO in 2014 (lost 95-35). All the while I have grown increasingly passionate about applying my own experience protecting the working and middle classes to the national scale during a time of heightened capitalist oppression.
Other Professional Experience: No information submitted
Education: No information submitted
Community Service: I am currently Vice President of the Southwest Olympia Neighborhood Association.
Statement: America has been caught in a torrent of corporate power for too long. Our democracy is endangered
when politics become more infl uenced by big money than by the plights of the people. The middle and working
classes deserve fair treatment from our government, especially when it comes to protecting vital American service
and labor jobs from offshoring.
Public offi ce should be the pinnacle of public service—if I am elected, it will be.
Born in Boston, Massachusetts, I grew up with a particular appreciation for democracy’s ability to empower everyday men and women to fi ghtfor what’s right. During my service in the U.S. Air Force (1966-1970), I moved to Washington State—where I met my wife and together we raised our son. When I entered the civilian workforce, I witnessed instances of poor working conditions, contract violations and management abuse. These issues stuck with
me, eventually leading me to serve as a local union steward of Communications Workers of America to uphold the
rights of workers. I was a member of the executive board, treasurer, and chairman of the steward education committee. This experience showed me the necessity and the power of making every voice feel heard.
As your Senator, I will demand fair trade over free trade agreements like TPP to protect the American job market
and economy. I will also lobby for tuition-free college education and universal access to Medicare, among other key
progressive measures. Most importantly, each detail of my platform is centered on your opinions, needs and past
subjections to injustice. That’s why I’m leading an insurgent political campaign, supported entirely by individual
supporters instead of corporations. I believe that it’s time to take the big money back out of politics and remember
the masses. I run for you, America.
I listen to you.
For More Information:
(360) 515-1263
phil_cornell@yahoo.com
philcornell4ussenate.org
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
11 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Sam Wright
(Prefers The Human Rights Party)
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience: Fisheries Research Scientist with fi ve decades of experience managing fi sh populations and fi sh habitats.
Education: B.S. degree in Wildlife Management from Humboldt State University.
Community Service: Served two years in the U.S. Army Infantry. Founded The Human Rights Party in 2012 to give
candidates and individual voters a new alternative that may be more in line with their personal beliefs and convictions.
Statement: To ensure life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, both health care and education must be recognized
as basic human rights for all Americans. The only cost effective way to provide universal health care is by providing a single national insurance program, including removal of the responsibility from both employers and employees (private and public sectors, including education). Exclusion of private insurance and advertising companies
(and the IRS) from health care would save the American people trillions of dollars in unnecessary costs during
the 21st century. Severing the current mandatory linkage between health care insurance and employment would
create a major new and sustainable stimulus for job creation and growth of the American economy. For education, we need to recognize the essential role of post-secondary training as part of our defi nition of basic education.
Tuition fees in state college systems must be drastically reduced or eliminated. The only tax policy change needed
would be to begin taxing capital gains at the same percentage rates as earned or ordinary income.
For More Information:
(360) 943-4424
samwright1522@comcast.net
thehumanrightsparty.org
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
12 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Chris Vance
(Prefers Republican Party)
Elected Experience: Elected twice to the Washington State House of Representatives, and twice to the Metropolitan
King County Council
Other Professional Experience: Currently: Adjunct professor, University of Washington. Public affairs consultant and
small business owner. Special Assistant, Offi ce of the Superintendent of Public Instruction
Education: Bachelor of Arts, Political Science, Western Washington University
Community Service: Chris and Ann Vance are regular volunteers with Reach Out Federal Way, a program to serve
the homeless in South King County. Chris coached youth sports for many years and is the past President of the Auburn Youth Soccer Association.
Statement: I’m running for the Senate because, probably like you, I’m fed up. I’m fed up with the gridlock in Congress and the politicians in both parties who won’t tell the American people the truth about the challenges we face.
The truth is, the gap between rich and poor is widening because our economy is not producing enough good
middle class jobs. We are over $19 trillion in debt, and Social Security and Medicare are on the road to insolvency.
There are solutions to these problems but Republicans and Democrats refuse to compromise and work together.
To address our debt crisis I support a bipartisan plan that includes limits on discretionary spending, structural
changes that will strengthen Social Security and Medicare, and pro-growth tax reform. These steps would create
jobs and reduce our debt.
To keep the peace I will always vote to keep America’s defenses strong. We must do whatever it takes to protect
our homeland from terrorism, and the United States must lead the fi ght to destroy ISIS in Syria and Iraq and deny
them the territory they need to recruit and train followers. The Iran nuclear deal was a dangerous and destabilizing
mistake.
It’s time for a big change, and that will never happen as long as we keep sending the same people to Washington, D.C. year after year. I believe with new leadership we can bring Republicans and Democrats together to solve
America’s problems. I would appreciate your vote.
Chris Vance and his wife, Ann, have been married for 28 years. They have two children: Adam, age 24, a recent
graduate of the University of Washington, and Natalie, age 20, a sophomore at Washington State University. The
Vances live in Auburn.
For More Information:
(253) 326-0816
info@chrisvanceforsenate.com
www.chrisvanceforsenate.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
13 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Uncle Mover
(Prefers Republican Party)
Elected Experience: None.
Other Professional Experience: Lobbyist on transportation issues 1987-1998/Olympia -Washington D.C. / Federal
Witness: Ohio - West Virginia: 1994-2000.
Education: Some College /Attorney Pro-Se-1988 - Present.
Community Service: At large Transportation Watch Dog. Advocate for funding for Drug addiction - Homelessness.
Statement: My current persona might suggest that we may be related. Well, in a way we are. We're all Washington
State citizens whether you lean right, left, or somewhere in the middle. As a matter of fact we all desire the same
end result, "a better quality of life".
Unfortunately, we don't always behave like that. If you look in the newspapers, you will notice the obituaries of
those that have recently passed. Next, read the 'public notice' section. Astonishing enough, there are more people
fi ling for 'divorce' than those who have died.
So, who are we really? Society as we know it has become a cauldron of 'throw away' relationships, that suggests
that we are a country at war, with ourselves.
If you have children, the impact to their lives is a factor this country will one day inherit. A generation of broken marriages, displaced family values, misguided judgement, of whose parents rely on dating services in hope of fi nding
someone new.
Frankly, it's a problem Congress cannot repair. If you have children, please think twice before fi ling for divorce.
Meanwhile, I will do my best to be the Uncle those kids may never have.
Also, I'd like to thank my parents for 'sticking it out' while raising twelve of us. It wasn't easy by any means. My
father loaned me the fi ling fee in my fi rst attempt at public offi ce in 1988. Ten years later, I took my mother to Washington D.C. for a tour of the White House. Some things you just don't forget.
For More Information:
(206) 546-9545
mike_the_mover@comcast.net
www.theoriginalmikethemover.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
14 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Zach Haller
(Prefers Independent Party)
Elected Experience: No information submitted
Other Professional Experience: No information submitted
Education: No information submitted
Community Service: No information submitted
Statement: No information submitted
For More Information:
(773) 988-6776
zach.haller@gmail.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
15 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Donna Rae Lands
(Prefers Conservative Party)
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience: Independent Business owner since 1991Washington State Realtor from 1997-2006
Wife, mother, grandmother, sister, aunt, friend, and neighbor.Cloud walker on the internet before the cloud came to
be.Feisty neighbor to my local, county and state governmental offi cials when they wanted their Sewage Treatment
Facility, next door and uphill from my humble abode
Education: Edison, Bemiss,Shaw, Rodgers and NC in Spokane-HS Diploma 1969-1979Spokane Community CollegeAAS- Electrical Engineering Technolgy1985-1988 (3 year degree)Life 1961-Present
Community Service: Planting seeds of wisdom with whom I meet.
Statement: Dear Voter and neighbor:
It is on my bucket list to try to make a difference in any way I can. I saved my babysitting money to get my name on
the ballot because my hubby said I could spend it anyway I wanted too. I chose to spend it this way. I promised my
son and grandson I would do this.
I have studied the federal government and our country. I have good news, and bad news. The good news is we are
a strong nation with a great foundation. We have great bones...The bad news is our country has gone from being
independent to being dependent upon the chains we revere. In doing so... we as a people are forced to accept the
things that are against our Liberties of Conscience. Our Federal Government wants us as good moms and good
dads to close our eyes to the ailments that affl ict our country and its citizens. Our government wants us divided-Our
government created the crevasses that have deepened and widened.
My experience with my government has been fi ghting against them when they wanted their Sewage Treatment
Facility next door and uphill from my humble abode. I do not know any special interest groups or any lobbyist
groups...I am the outsider of outsiders.I believe if I can move one sewer at the state level-I can move another sewer
at the Federal Level.
I pray you make a difference in your life along the way and fi nd your true peace and destiny.For land's sake, please
consider me your true Lady.
Thank you for your time and consideration. Always DRL
For More Information:
(509) 447-0631
Ladydonnalands@gmail.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
16 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Mohammad Said
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Elected Experience: Precinct Committee for Grant County. State Delegate-Democratic Convention. National Platform
Committee 1988. Former Vice Chair-Democratic Central Committee for Grant County. Committeeman-Washington
State Democratic Central Committee 2016.
Other Professional Experience: Expert in healthcare, holding one of the highest medical degrees in the US. Expert of
US-Arab/Muslim relations. See Facebook & Website.
Education: M.D. with honors, PhD with honors, MPH, Specialist in Internal Medicine, Family Practice, Geriatrics,
Preventive & Alternative Medicine, Former Asst. Clinical Professor at VA in Fargo, ND
Community Service: Volunteer for over 12 years at Washington State correction facilities and others of local, county,
and state.
Statement: In 1992 as co-founder, I attended Rainbow Coalition in Seattle with my intention to run for U.S. Senate at
the same time State Senator Patty Murray came for endorsement. They convinced me to withdraw my name on her
behalf, and I agreed. For extensive review of my political activism and background, see my Facebook Dr.Mohammad
Said and website drsaid.net.
As a Democrat, I am leading a movement I established in 2012 with the name of American Centrist Movement.
Senator Bernie Sanders, if not the Democratic nominee, will lead a progressive movement.
On social issues, I am pro-life, pro-family, and pro-traditional marriage between a man and a woman.
On foreign policy, I advocate resolving Palestinian-Israeli confl ict by establishing a democratic, non-religious state
in Historic Palestine, where Jews, Muslims, and Christians can live together with equal rights under a constitution
similar to the U.S. This was adopted four times by the Grant County Democratic Convention, including 2016. Also
adopted in 2016 include containing extremism in the Middle East and supporting the nuclear agreement with Iran,
which should include Israel.
On healthcare, I advocate expanding Medicare to include the young up to 25, universal healthcare for the basic as
one single payer, reforming Welfare to eliminate abuse, and reforming the Department of Health - especially the
Medical Quality Assurance Commission, as attorneys are calling the shots, making doctors practice defensive medicine. On immigration, I advocate institution of guest workers program.
I advocate amendments to the Constitution which include reform War Powers Act, direct trade with foreign countries by states, National Guard to be under state control, Second Amendment as privilege and not a right, allow
foreign-born Americans to run for president, and U.S. Congress to meet in states by rotation.
For More Information:
(509) 754-4689
drsaidusa@yahoo.com
http://www.drsaid.net/
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
17 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Eric John Makus
(Prefers Republican Party)
Elected Experience: No Prior Offi ce.
Other Professional Experience: Attorney at Law, Private Practice (2009-Present); Author, Publisher, Business Owner
(1987-2009); and, Special Assistant to United States Representative Thomas S. Foley (1983-1984).
Education: Whitman College, BA, Political Science, 1984; University of Southern California, MPL, (Master of Planning) concentrating in Public/Private Enterprises, 1987; University of Washington, Certifi cate, Intellectual Property
Management, 2003; and, Newport High School (Bellevue, Washington), Diploma, 1980.
Community Service: Volunteer & Spokesperson: Rolling Readers USA and TreePeople.
Statement: My Fellow Citizen,
We are one of the 4,088,397 registered voters in Washington today. With our votes, we hold the power to control
our government. Our Constitutional rights make us citizens of the United States of America. I am a proud American.
I want to make us all proud Americans.
By casting your ballot, you are exercising your authority for which so many brave Americans before us have made
the ultimate sacrifi ce. Salute our members of national service. Cast your ballot with pride and conviction. It is my
privilege to be your candidate for United States Senator.
We are over 7 million strong. We live in 39 counties and possess an abundance of wealth in our people and nature.
Our magnifi cent coast and inland waters in the west, and Grand Coulee Dam, towering over the agricultural riches
of the east. Washington may very well be the greatest state in our union.
We face challenges and adversity. Our population is growing and changing rapidly. More and more Americans are
making Washington their home. We must address hard public enemies such as drug addiction and mental health,
separately from crime. The menaces of racism and intolerance must be confronted with the weapons of kindness,
understanding, and acceptance. We must join together to secure our borders and protect our homeland. We must
build for the future by constructing a transportation infrastructure that delivers mobility and progress; in air, on
land, and at sea. Washington is home to a broad range of business excellence and leadership. I pledge to completely support business.
I earned my way through Whitman College. I became a Washington lawyer without law school. My record is independence. I am beholden only to you. I am prepared to serve you as our next United States Senator. Makus Great
Again.
For More Information:
(206) 419-0581
Eric@Makus.com
www.Makus.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
18 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Alex Tsimerman
(Prefers Standupamerica Party)
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience: Business, Business consultant and Caregiver for my mother.
Education: Graduated from college, graduated from University, degree in Engineering and Management in 1973.
Community Service: Won class action in 1997 for housing discrimination, which included HUD. Won a very unique
class action in 2015 against DSHS for stealing $100 million from 50,000 people. Speaking over 850 times in many
council chambers, with StandUP-America, about local government corruption to restore our Constition, right to
freedom of speech and our fundamental principle - life liberty and pursuit of happiness. You can see Mr. Tsimerman
speak in council chambers every day! President of StandUP-America.us
Statement: Are we better now than four years ago? Stop fascism with idiotic face.
StandUPAmerica for Donald Trump and Alex Tsimerman so we can bring America back on track and to common
sense – Of, By and For the people. We need to stop Seattle emerald nitwit; a new evil, a new USSR (United Seattle
Soviet Republic), a democrat, progressive, liberal, socialist who brought the State to total collapse and pure fascism.
Mr. Tsimerman believes we need to steer our government away from special interests and introducing policies that
will put money in people’s pockets, restore love of country and raise our status in the world.
Our country has been poorly served by the political class, corporation and establishment who value their self-interest over the interests of the United States and its citizens. We need end the corrupting infl uence of special interests
once and for all. Ordinary Americans have lost all power - whether it be economic, political, media or legal.
Mr. Tsimerman thinks tax burden inhibits economic growth and takes too much from hard working Americans. We
must reduce the burden by lowering rates, eliminating loopholes, and simplifying the tax code. We must pay particular attention to fi xing our corporate tax structure so capital and jobs will come back to America.
Mr. Tsimerman believes Democrats and Republicans destroyed jobs in America. We will make college affordable
and make sure we fi x our healthcare system. With the money we have in the system, all Americans can feel comfortable.
We need to fi x our traffi c problem and open HOV lanes to Disabled citizens, Senior citizens and Veterans. We need
election fi nancial reform, make everyone equal under Constitution and law, establish citizen court to monitor and
evaluate elected offi cials and limit every elected offi cials to two terms to stop the “iron cycle” of corruption.
For More Information:
(206) 324-6264
Standup@AlexforAmerica.com
AlexforAmerica.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
19 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Dr Pano Churchill
(Prefers Lincoln Caucus Party)
United States Senator
Elected Experience: Non-Politician
Other Professional Experience: CEO -- WellHeart, Seattle Wireless and numerous other Mature Companies, & StartUps. Entrepreneur. Leader. Innovator. Angel Investor. Educator. Author. Philanthropist. Job Creator, having started
tons of Tech & Science companies by bringing people together to collaborate, solve diffi cult problems & get things
done, we create valuable wealthy jobs.
Education: University of Washington - Pol.Sci.&Economics BA 1989. Oxford Environmental University - Cybernetics,
Earth Science, & Public Health PHD 2003, 2007.
Community Service: Chairman Environmental Parliament 1991-2016. Worked on United Nations Climate Change
COPprocess & the Paris Accord. People's Health International, Churchill Society, A4ID, WWF, various charities &
philanthropies.
Statement: I invite you to vote for me. If you're tired of the mess in Congress, tired of corrupt partisan politics, I ask
you to support my candidacy for the US Senate. Stand up and say proudly that this country, and our government,
belong to all of us; and not just to the crony government squatters, the bureaucrats, and the wealthy lobbyists &
campaign contributors.
We need to claim back our country from the DC insiders, from the narrow minded establishment, & from the stale
political parties. This is our country and we aim to upset the apple-cart of those vested interests who think they own
it.
We must take control of our Republic because we need to innovate and better our Democracy - same as we do in
our own work, our family, our business, our community, and in our own life.
We need an economy, a budget, a tax code, a health care system, and a system of justice that works for all Americans. We need to refresh our American Revolution demanding that government represents us all, not just the politically connected. We need a bigger economic pie where more Washingtonians have a bigger piece. We need strong
American leadership, not just wars and retreat.
Given the serious crises this country faces, we cannot expect the career politicians who created the problems, to
solve them. Instead, I will take on big bureaucracy, big government, big banks, big unions, and big businesses,
because am not tied-up to lobbyists and special interests. We don't need a permanent political class that thinks it's
entitled to rule over us. We need citizen leaders who'll put principle and people, before party.
And as Lincoln said: "If we stand together, there is nothing we cannot accomplish." It's time to Reboot Washington.
God Bless America.
For More Information:
(206) 451-7657
ENVPAR@GMAIL.COM
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
2 0 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Patty Murray
(Prefers Democratic Party)
United States Senator
Elected Experience: Shoreline School Board, State Senator, United States Senator
Other Professional Experience: Shoreline Community College Cooperative Preschool Teacher
Education: Graduate, Washington State University
Community Service: No information submitted
Statement: Our country isn’t working for people the way it should be. And most days, Congress does very little to
confront the challenges we face.
Despite the obstacles, I work hard to break through the gridlock and dysfunction and move us toward a country and
state that works for all families, not just the wealthiest few.
I know you want a Senator committed to getting results. That’s why, after the Tea Party shut down the government
in 2013, I led bipartisan negotiations to reopen the government and restore important investments in education,
jobs, and other local priorities. After I heard from parents and teachers that No Child Left Behind wasn’t working for
our students, I wrote a bill to fi nally fi x this broken law, help end the reliance on overtesting, and put our students
fi rst. My bipartisan bill was signed into law, and NCLB is fi nally ending.
I am running for reelection because there is so much more Congress should be doing to help workers, veterans,
families, and the economy—and I want to keep up the fi ght and make sure Washington state families have a strong
voice at the table who will stand up for their values and priorities.
I am running to keep fi ghting to create jobs and grow the economy in a way that actually helps local families. Instead of tax cuts for the rich, I think we should give tax cuts to working families and invest in college affordability,
student loan debt reduction, affordable childcare, increasing the minimum wage, helping veterans transition to the
workforce—and more. And I’m going to keep fi ghting back against those who would hurt our workers, turn back the
clock on women’s health, and divide our country.
I ask for your vote to keep fi ghting for you and all Washington state families.
For More Information:
(206) 659-4915
campmail@pattymurray.com
pattymurray.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
2 1 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Ted Cummings
(Prefers Independent Party)
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience: Clerical and Technical Unit Chairman USW local 338, Co-owner of Pell Creek Land
and Livestock in Chattaroy WA. Past President of the Inland Empire Arabian Horse Club, Potroom Supervisor at Alcoa Massena West and Massena East Aluminum smelters. Team Process Leader Northwest Alloys. Physical Testing
Lab Technician Kaiser Aluminum.
Education: Gonzaga Prep High School 1979. Graduate Spokane Community College 1997 Associate of Arts degree.
Community Service: One gallon donor Inland Northwest Blood Center.
Statement: I was born and raised in Spokane Washington; I have been married to my wife Denise for thirtyfour
years and have two grown sons. I am a member of the United Steelworkers and work in an aluminum rolling mill.
We live on a small ranch north of Spokane where we raise horses and cattle.
I grew up in a middle class family in a nice neighborhood, attended great schools staffed with devoted teachers.
I have been blessed with good health, some intelligence and an abundance of common sense. I have been fortunate to have been employed in jobs that I have enjoyed and learned from my whole life. I have had the opportunity
to travel, own a home and live the American dream. I have never been hungry, lacked medical care and there has
never been a day while I have been alive that I wasn’t fully aware that someone loved and valued me. I share this
because while I have been given so much there are so many Americans that have had a completely different experience in life.
I want to take a leadership role in the discussions on creating and growing good paying jobs, repairing our infrastructure and reducing national debt. I want to see proper care and respect for our veterans and the elderly. I will
work to stop the poor and the middle class from being victimized by big banks and Wall Street by ending economic
inequality. I will work diligently to return the trust of the American people in their government.
We have seen what the two party system has done over the last few decades; it’s time for real change. I am endorsed by USW local 338 and have a recommendation from the Spokane, Kitsap and Yakima AFL-CIO Central labor
councils.
For More Information:
(509) 319-6960
ted@ivoted2016.com
ivoted2016.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
2 2 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Thor Amundson
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Elected Experience: None.
Other Professional Experience: Carpenter on state and federal betterment projects. A unique project Mr. Amundson
has been involved in is as a domestic carpenter, building furniture out of recycled materials to better the environment.
Education: Graduated in 1979 from Eisenhower High School in Yakima, Washington.
Community Service: None.
Statement: Hi, I'm Thor Amundson, native son, born and raised in Eastern Washington. I've lived and worked
throughout the state, and this has given me the opportunity to talk with people in all walks of life, and to consider
the variety of issues facing them. I see my primary duty as Senator as being on the ultimate betterment project
for our state and country. I believe that without a little more opportunity for the next generation, we cannot have a
healthy civilization.
Picture a state and a nation where your children will be able to afford to live. A land without discrimination, and
where the working person receives their just reward. A place where worker's rights are protected; where innovative,
effective leadership inspires; and where elected offi cials are chosen by the people, not by their fi nancial contributors.
Rather than propose campaign reform, I'm going to implement it. I am not an attorney, and I am not a politician.
Therefore, there will be no question about who I am working for. I will accept no PAC money whatsoever in my bid
for US. Senate. I will lead Washington into the 21st century. Only your vote for Thor Amundson, for U.S. Senate, is
required to make this possible.
True leadership is an extension of the will of the people. With my mandate from you, the voters, I will express that
will. As the fi rst Senator not fi nanced by PAC money, and hailing from one of the best states in the Union, I will stir
the very dredges of the old guard in Washington D.C., and at the same time provide inspiration to anyone else who
truly cares about the future of our great Nation. Please vote for Thor Amundson, U.S. Senate.
For More Information:
(509) 961-1548
thorforsenate2016@gmail.com
www.thor2016.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
2 3 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Scott Nazarino
(Prefers Republican Party)
Elected Experience: I have been an elected PCO.
Other Professional Experience: I have been in the Financial Services industry for 24 years. I had been in the Securities Industry for almost 15 of those years. I deeply understand the markets and the oil and gas industry. I have
served on a non-profi t board before.
Education: Diploma, Liberty High School, Renton, WA 1983. A.A., Bellevue College, Bellevue, WA 1985. B.A., Northwest University, Kirkland, WA 1990. LUTCF, Life Underwriter Training Council, Bethesda, MD 1995.
Community Service: I had been involved in the City of Sammamish and have publicly stood up for various issues.
Statement: I offi cially declared my candidacy for the United States Senate on January 21st in front of the United
States Courthouse in Seattle.
Public offi cials were established to represent us. We are a free country that is self-governed. The best way to maintain our freedom is to elect good, fair and honest people to represent us.
I have been in the Financial Services industry for 24 years. Some of my specialties are retirement and estate planning. Being a small business owner in the Financial Services industry has taught me how to understand our economy at an in-depth level. I am also licensed through the State of Washington to offer Health Insurance policies.
My experience applies to some of our most critical issues, like Health Care, Social Security, Medicare, Retirement
Savings, etc.
I am very passionate about serving and caring for people. I can relate to people of all economic standings and backgrounds. I have relationships with people at all levels in our society. Even though I am running as a Republican I
will always endeavor to put the people before my party. The party leadership understands my position on this issue
too.
I ran for the Sammamish City Council in 2007 and have stood up for numerous issues since then.
I promise that I will do all I can to serve you. I want to reach all people. I would like Democrats, Independents and
all people of any persuasion to please consider voting for me. I fi gure that when we put people fi rst we all win. I
was born in Seattle and have lived in Washington my entire life. I have 3 children. My daughter is 18 and my identical twin boys are 16. My campaign slogan is "A Better Washington for All".
For More Information:
(425) 615-5178
snazarino@gmail.com
www.ScottNazarino.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
2 4 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Mike Luke
(Prefers Libertarian Party)
Elected Experience: I have run for offi ce locally and worked on various campaigns throughout Snohomish county.
Other Professional Experience: A Washington state business owner from 2002 to 2014 in the Edmonds area.
Education: An associates degree from Edmonds community college in 1996.
Community Service: I was previously elected to the position of legislative district chair of the 32nd LD Republicans
and an elected member of the Snohomish county Republican party executive board from 2012 to 2014, additionally
an elected Precinct Committee Offi cer since 2008. I left the Republican party in January 2016 to become a member
of the Libertarian party.
Statement: The world is far from perfect and I acknowledge that. It can be better, not through increasing and micromanaging government but by reducing the presence of government in our lives. Each election like this we are so
often limited to only 2 choices from the major political parties, resulting in either settling for the lesser of two evils
or having no choice at all? The voter, our state and nation deserve better choices.
I am open to individual trade agreements with individual nations provided it enriches our nation and we can withdraw anytime. I am against agreements like the TPP as it robs our nation of jobs to enrich foreign interests. We have
lost so many jobs overseas for no good reason and our economy has suffered too long.
The current US foreign policy does not keep us safe. It creates danger to our people while putting future generations in unsustainable debt which has weakened our economic security. But the highest cost is on us as a people.
Look what we have allowed to be done to our loyal soldiers? While we have allowed the government to indebt us to
engage in unnecessary and never ending war, look at the blood that has been shed and the injuries that our soldiers
and their families have suffered over the last 15 years.
There is no authorization for the federal government to prohibit Marijuana, this is a matter for the states. Although
I believe in an individual’s right to consume whatever they desire to, the real transgression against the people is
denying them a right to a medical necessity and medical research. Marijuana should be reclassifi ed and this federal
prohibition ended.
To see a more complete position on these issues and many others please visit my website: Luke4senate.com
Thankyou!
For More Information:
(206) 451-5321
luke4senate@frontier.com
Luke4senate.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
2 5 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Chuck Jackson
(Prefers Independent Party)
Elected Experience: No
Other Professional Experience: Worked on an Aircraft Carrier (3 years, 8 months, 5 days), Container Ships, Ferry
Boats, Research ships, and Tankers (34 years). Licensed by the United States Coast Guard, For MEBA
Education: Minor; School of Hard Knocks, Major; U. of L.
Community Service: Yes
Statement: I hope you have had enough. Our Kids' Inheritance Has Been Squandered. The national debt has exceeded 19 trillion dollars and interest paid so far is over 11 trillion dollars. Who is going to pay off this debt, surely
not the decaying middle class?
The Tyranny of Debt: "An exceedingly burdensome debt has been created ($19.2 trillion). For the payment of interest
it becomes necessary to have recourse to new loans, which do not swallow up but only add to the capital debt. And
when this credit is exhausted it becomes necessary by new taxes to cover, not the loan, but Only The Interest On It.
These taxes are a debit employed to cover a debit." $11.2 trillion has already been squandered on interest; This was
a great plan for the banks - lenders but a horrible plan for those having to pay the interest - principle!
Wall Street and The Hedge Fund High Fliers created this mess, their greed has cost U.S. jobs, repairs to the infrastructure, pensions, medication and inadequate health care for Veterans', One Hedge Fund Gambler gamed the
system $3.4 Billion one year. That's more the 70,000 service personnel are paid a year.
Einstein’s defi nition for insanity was doing the same thing over and over again expecting different results. When the
same people are elected over and over again with the same disastrous results it's time to let them go. It is time to
replace the incumbent and bring in an independent who is outraged by these numbers and their continual rise. (We
are under a Tyranny of Debt.)
This voters Pamphlet allows 300 words, not enough to deal adequately with major problems; more information at
website http//www.scaryreality.com
It is time to elect Chuck Jackson as Senator; Representing the people of Washington State.
For More Information:
19trilliondebt@gmail.com
scaryreality.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
2 6 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
United States Senator
Jeremy Teuton
(Prefers System Reboot Party)
Elected Experience: Dr. Teuton has never run for elected offi ce before. He is running now because he believes that
while our government is not currently functional it is not beyond repair.
Other Professional Experience: Staff Scientist, Post-Doctoral Fellow, Doctoral Fellow, Undergraduate Researcher, 1hr
photo clerk at Costco, Photographer, Cutco sales associate.
Education: University of Washington-Seattle graduated in 2001: B.S. Biology (Cell and Molecular), minor in Chemistry, B.A. Psychology. University of Wisconsin-Madison graduated in 2009:PhD Cellular and Molecular Biology.
Community Service: Sustainable transportation and renewable power advocate, husband, father, good neighbor,
and concerned citizen.
Statement: Dr. Jeremy Teuton is a scientist and lifelong problem solver. He is asking anyone unsatisfi ed with our
current dysfunctional government to vote for actual change. Jeremy has lived and worked in both Eastern and Western Washington and currently lives in Pasco, Washington. He works at the Pacifi c Northwest National Laboratory and
is an alumnus of Cheney High School near Spokane and the University of Washington-Seattle.
Senators are elected representatives and leaders of the people. Representing the people is a high calling; one that
the national party system has undermined with the aid of the lobbying industry. It is a crucial responsibility to listen
to those you represent, present clear solutions, and act with the people's support. Those responsibilities have fallen
prey to polling, private meetings with lobbyists, political strategists, and party leaders instead of working to perform
the will of the people.
A candidate that takes money from anyone other than those that can vote for him -including corporations and lobbyists, national political parties, or out-of-state donors- cannot be trusted to truly represent the people. Today, with
secure digital communications, there is no justifi cation for senators to spend so much time in D.C. instead of being
available to those they should represent.
The Constitution provides a functional government operating system. Many of the aspects crippling the function of
our government are not part of that original system. Running purely on issues ignores that until the system functions, no issue -including tax policy, foreign policy, social security and health care- can be resolved.
Dr. Jeremy Teuton brings new solutions and is willing to fi ght to restore function to government; eliminating "playing politics" from the discussion. He is running to represent all the people of Washington.
The system has not failed, it just needs to be rebooted.
For More Information:
(509) 579-8097
drjeremyteuton@gmail.com
http://www.drjeremyteuton.com/
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
2 7 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 6th Congressional District
Elected Experience: U.S. Representative: 2013-Present, Appropriations Committee; Listed in Washington Post as
one of the Five Most Effective Democrats in Congress; AMVETS American Veterans Silver Helmet Award; Retail Federation Hero of Main Street; NPCA Friend of the National Parks; State Legislator: 2005-2012
Other Professional Experience: Former Vice President, Economic Development Board for Tacoma-Pierce County;
Former Management Consultant, McKinsey & Company
Education: Port Angeles High School; Bachelor's Degree, Princeton University; Doctoral Degree, University of
Oxford
Community Service: Former Trustee, Tacoma Community College; Former Board Member, Gig Harbor Chamber
of Commerce; Former Board Member, Peninsula Schools Education Foundation; Member, Rotary; Member, Gig
Harbor United Methodist Church
Statement: As a new representative, my focus has been getting our economy and Congress on track.
We need to fi x a broken political system. I'm leading by example. When some in Congress forced a government
shutdown, I gave up my own pay. I'm part of a coalition of Democrats and Republicans working to set aside partisan
bickering and focus on progress. I've championed bills to reduce the infl uence of big money and special interests in
elections and authored bipartisan legislation to crack down on politicians who violate campaign fi nance rules.
We need an economy that works for everyone. Having grown up on the Olympic Peninsula and having worked for
a decade in economic development in Tacoma, I'm focused on supporting small businesses and growing opportunities all across our region. I've introduced legislation to make it tougher to offshore jobs and led efforts to ensure
shipyard workers don't take a pay cut when they travel for work. I'm fi ghting to protect Social Security and Medicare
so seniors like my 106-year-old grandmother can count on the benefi ts they've earned.
We need strong schools and a skilled workforce. As the son of two schoolteachers and as a dad, I've consistently
supported funding for public schools. It's too hard for middle-class families to afford college, so I've authored legislation to boost fi nancial aid and reduce student debt.
We need to protect our environment for future generations. I've been working to clean up Puget Sound and protect
National Parks and areas that make our region special.
We need to support military families and veterans. I've sponsored bills to help transitioning veterans and fi x problems at the VA. If you serve our country, we should have your back. I ask for your vote so I can keep working to get
things on track.
For More Information:
(253) 572-4355
info@derekkilmer.com
www.derekkilmer.com
Derek Kilmer
(Prefers Democratic Party)
continued
2 8 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 6th Congressional District
Stephan Andrew Brodhead
(Prefers Republican Party)
Elected Experience: I was elected to wash fl ight line trucks and clean the barracks latrine several dozen times
Other Professional Experience: Small Business owner...USAF aircraft technician..USAF fl ight engineer...auto mechanic..handy man
Education: B.A.S. Industrial Science..Colorado State University..;Associates Aircraft Maintenace Technology CCAF..
Associates Flight Engineering CCAF
Community Service: Just a small business owner
Statement: As second in command of the Nichols Expedition, my great plus grandfather disembarked Man-o-Wars
and led the troops that took New Amsterdam. In 1776, we would stand with George Washington at the Battle of
Long Island and defend the retreat across the East river. In the 1840s, we would fi ght in Mexcio under Franklin
Pierce for our manifest destiny. In the 1850s we would vote for the creation of the Washington territory, as well as
the Fremont expeditions and topography surveys for the transcontinental railroad and telegraph. Our efforts created
millions of jobs. During the American Civil war, we would take bullets for emancipation and be one of Abraham
Lincoln's emancipation commissioners. We would also vote to fund the Capitol Extension that built the West wing,
East wing, Capitol dome and Congressional library. Today these great legislative chambers are full of special interest hacks that never actually read a bill.
My family's fi ngerprints are all over the blueprint of the American dream. We have always erred on the right side of
history. Today the American dream is in danger. Special interest has their fi ngerprints all over the blueprint of economic oppression. The last 15 years have seen the worst foreign policy in the history of this great nation. The last 15
years have seen the National debt grow to 115% of GDP. Meanwhile, our children are drowning in student loan debt
and are underemployed. As Americans we can restore the promise of America by embracing solar power, retooling
our higher education system, and providing solar system fi nancing as part of home loans and refi nancing. As your
representative, I will submit bills that facilitate an energy renaissance that will create hundreds of thousands of jobs
for our younger generations. Go forth and have no fear. Lets us be bold
For More Information:
(253) 237-1860
Info@BrodheadForCongress.us
www.BrodheadforCongress.us
continued
2 9 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 6th Congressional District
Elected Experience: University Student Body President, Community councils, State President WV American Association of University Professors.
Other Professional Experience: Led and active in safeguarding health and safety of communities for 40 years.
Taught in colleges and universities in Michigan and West Virginia for 37 years.Director and owner of art galleries in
New York, Michigan, West Virginia, Washington: Manchester, Port Orchard, Bellingham and Seattle.
Education: BFA Wayne State University, Detroit. Attended Law School, University of MichiganMFA University of
Michigan, Ann ArborDoctor of Arts, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 1977
Community Service: Director, WV state humanities association, Manchester Community Association, MCAC, Port of
Manchester
Statement: If elected I will not seek re-election. I will not accept contributions from corporate donors. If elected I'll
serve the interests of the people of this congressional district, the state and the country.
The most important issues which I will work tirelessly for are: College and university education without debt for all
the young people (to age 40) of this state and country. Bernie is right. Why? Because our youth are our "seed corn"
Not only for their prosperity, but also for the prosperity of our country as our future leaders to help us heal our endangered planet.
This can be accomplished by bringing back the CCC, Civilian Conservation Corps of FDR, so that their work, their
contribution of healing our nation's infrastructure. will earn them a free college education (like the GI bill after
WWII).
I will hold Saturday free classes for students and parents from 9 to noon during the months of June and July at
my home under the willow tree on how to fi nd and navigate a "no debt" higher education (because debt is a kind
of slavery and indentured servitude). I went all the way through higher education without owing anyone a cent by
working with skills that I learned in high school. I'll share them with you and send essays to the local newspapers
and facebook. Thank you for your consideration.
For More Information:
(360) 769-2123
pnuchims@aol.com
Paul L. Nuchims
(Prefers Democratic Party)
continued
3 0 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 6th Congressional District
Todd A. Bloom
(Prefers Republican Party)
Elected Experience: First offi ce sought
Other Professional Experience: Navy offi cer with eleven years’ post-9/11 active service; Big Four experience working
with national/global public companies and private wealth clients; Sectors: Energy, fi nance, construction; licensed
CPA, CFA, CFP and attorney (Louisiana)
Education: MA - Naval War College; LLM, Tax - UW; JD, MBA - Tulane (Freeman Fellowship); BA – Simpson College
(Epsilon Sigma honor society)
Community Service: Judicial experience as FINRA Arbitrator; CFA Institute - Examination Program; Adjunct Faculty
– University of New Orleans, Tulane, UW (Milgard School); Volunteer – Louisiana Bar, Client Protection Fund; Offi cer
– CFA Society of Louisiana; Finance Committee – HNJ Parish (New Orleans)
Statement: As a Naval Offi cer, I'm sworn to support and defend the constitution; now I’m asking Sixth District
voters, for the honor of representing our military- and veteran-heavy district in Congress. I offer fresh leadership
to support the district’s important military presence. In addition, I offer practical real-world business experience to
focus on tax and regulatory reforms to stimulate our economy.
National security is naturally a top concern: terrorism, self-radicalized attackers and the grave threats emanating
from an unstable Middle East. We are also seeing the increasing belligerence of historic rivals such as Russia and
China. In Afghanistan, our soldiers are unable to act against a resurgent Taliban due to restrictive rules of engagement, and our sailors are humiliated by Iran. This should not be--we have the world's most powerful military. I
strongly opposed the Iran deal that gives billions to an untrustworthy Iranian regime. The incumbent voted in favor
of this deal.
Rosy reports of economic activity do not refl ect our daily experience. We have the lowest labor participation in
decades. Although we have been in “economic recovery” for over six years, household incomes have continued to
stagnate, lower than they were two decades ago. Especially hard-hit are recent college graduates, who can’t fi nd
suitable jobs, seasoned, skilled employees laid off during the recession who are unable to gain reemployment in
their fi elds; and our military who were sent home due to this administration’s downsizing. I'll work to protect Puget
Sound shipyard workers from cuts to per diem, and stop VA education cuts.
I respectfully request your vote: to restore strong economic growth by reforming taxes, streamlining regulations
and reducing burdens on small business; to give our veterans the support they need and deserve; and to provide
the national defense to keep America safe.
For More Information:
(253) 213-1982
electtoddbloom@gmail.com
www.electtoddbloom.com
continued
3 1 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 6th Congressional District
Elected Experience: No information submitted
Other Professional Experience: Army Warrant Offi cer Helicopter Pilot. Lead Pilot Rocky Mountain Helicopters EMS
Program Columbia, MO. Owner/Designated Broker Windermere Real Estate/Westport Inc for 25 years.
Education: Graduate Ocosta High School, Westport, WA. Graduate U.S. Army Warrant Offi cer Helicopter Program,
Fort Rucker Alabama serving four years in service. Real Estate License / Designated Broker State of Washington
since 1992.
Community Service: Fire District 3 Commissioner, Westport Planning Commission, President, Westport Grayland
Chamber of Commerce, Kiwanis Scholarship Auction Chair 11 years, City of Westport Lodging & Tourism Board,
Elementary School Facilities Committee and Bond Campaign, Founder and Chair Westport Salmon Tales Festival.
Statement: "We the People . . .," words that resonate now more than ever. The right of every citizen to have a voice
in how the country is governed remains one of our most important rights and yet laws have been enacted or interpreted in ways that have shifted power from the people toward political parties, corporations and wealthy individuals.
The vast sums of money fl owing into the elective process have stifl ed the ability of all but the wealthy or those supported by the wealthy to compete for offi ce. Until Citizens United is overturned, the ability for our country to recover
from the economic disaster brought on by Wall Street and the ruling class will be greatly hindered.
I am seeking offi ce as an “Independent." For years I held the opinion that the inability to have effective progress at
the federal level was due to the ideological differences between the two dominant political parties. It is my contention that we do not elect our representatives to bow to party elites or to answer to the corporations who pour egregious sums of money into their campaign. Too much is at stake.
While all across our great nation there remains vast differences between us on individual issues, the ideal that we
should all aspire to is that ours is a government “of the people, by the people and for the people!"
I pledge to you that as your congressman I will represent the interests of the people fi rst and foremost. I have been
inspired by the massive outcry from the citizens around this great country who are waking up to the reality of a
broken and corrupt government and who are rolling up their sleeves to make a difference for future generations of
Americans. My sleeves are rolled up.
For More Information:
(360) 268-1649
CoverdaleForCongress@gmail.com
CoverdaleForCongress.com
Mike Coverdale
(States No Party Preference)
continued
3 2 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 6th Congressional District
Elected Experience: I am running for offi ce for the second time. My experience is in life, activism and healthcare.
My resume is that of a tree-sitter and a plain clothes monk. Now a father, and a person who will always be awake,
aware and in contact with my constituents and will vote appropriately on behalf of the people of CD6 and the land
we are the stewards of.
Other Professional Experience: I've worked in healthcare and computers all my life and more recently organic farming.
Education: Asociate Arts, Shoreline Community College
Community Service: I've spent my life in service to the greater good.
Statement: There is a revolution afoot. It's clear in the facebook feeds and endless twitters that people are ready
for the change. Not just ready, it's considered literally a matter of life and death. There are hordes of us, running for
offi ce across the country, eager to make a change for the better. We are done with big money calling the shots. We
are awake, we are aware, we are organized. Gone are the days when the two party system can scare us into choosing the lesser evil. Good is here and good is rising to meet the worlds challenges in every corner of our nation. I am
a Green, a Berniecrat, a part of the Brand New Congress, a supporter of both senator Bernie Sanders as well as Dr.
Jill Stein. I believe in progressive values, environmental responsibility, inclusivity and multi-partisan politics. My
passion is in the alliances that cross these boundaries, especially from liberal to conservative. There's so much we
agree on. For the rest, I hold my ground and listen carefully.
I invite you to get to know me as much as you have time for, there are many channels available to contact me.
There always will be. We need a human in congress for this constituency that has the interests of the people and
the land as a focus. We can no longer afford to put corporate, dollar or party interests fi rst. The time has come. The
people are awake. The country belongs to US.
For More Information:
(206) 380-8637
tyvega@hotmail.com
Tyler Myles Vega
(Prefers Green Party)
end of office
3 3 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 8th Congressional District
Elected Experience: King County Sheriff, 1997-2005; US House of Representatives, 2005-Current
Other Professional Experience: Dave served in the US Air Force Reserve (1971-1976). Joined the King County Sheriff’s Offi ce in 1972. In 1997 became King County’s fi rst elected sheriff in 30 years
Education: Concordia Lutheran College, AA
Community Service: Served on King County’s Domestic Violence Council. Board of Directors for Special Olympics
of Washington. Founder of King County Violent Firearms Coalition. Former Member of King County Committee to
End Homelessness. Founder of King County Sheriff's Police Activities League. Youth coach and counselor. Two time
Washington Medal of Valor Recipient. National Sheriff of the Year.
Statement: Leadership. From the Sheriff’s Offi ce to Congress, I learned to stand up when others can’t, speak up
when others won’t, and measure up when lives are on the line. Simply put, I believe in making things right. With
better schools for our children, better health care for our families, a fairer tax code to create jobs, stronger laws that
protect the vulnerable, and more secure borders that protect our nation.
Integrity. Too often public offi cials sacrifi ce personal honor and integrity to win and keep offi ce. I never will, knowing we are better off when we pull together, and more united when we say to each other we refuse to compromise
rights that make us unique, freedoms that make us strong, and values that make America that “shining city upon a
hill”. Do this, and we’ll not only secure today, but also fi ght to ensure the many tomorrows our children and grandchildren will inherit.
Service. From the United States Air Force, to the King County Sheriff’s Offi ce, I witnessed everyday examples of
selfl ess sacrifi ce, individuals who put others before themselves. That experience taught me what it means to have
a servant’s heart, honored by an opportunity to help, and driven to show the courage and humility it takes to get
things done.
Teamwork. America needs a shot in the arm if it is to embrace the future as much as it commanded the past. That’s
why it’s more critical than ever to replace partisanship with common purpose, and pettiness with principle. Instead
of fi ghting each other, let's pull together, fi nd common ground, and fi ght for America. Only then will we create a
sounder economy, a stronger military, a more coherent foreign policy, and a more amazing nation where everyone,
by working hard, has a chance to live the American Dream.
For More Information:
(425) 455-3283
dave@davereichert.com
davereichert.com
Dave Reichert
(Prefers Republican Party)
continued
3 4 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 8th Congressional District
Margaret M. Walsh
(Prefers We R Independent Party)
Elected Experience: No information submitted
Other Professional Experience: I carried mail, for the United States Postal Service. I have done accounts payable,
data entry and inventory control.
Education: I earned an AA from Whatcom CC. I studied residential electric, computer aided drafting, and civil engineering at Bellingham Tech and Yakima Valley CC
Community Service: I have volunteered at the Red Cross and at VA hospitals.
Statement: Free thinking Americans, with intelligence and imagination, are essential defenders of informed voting
in our elections. Many, eligible to vote, stay home, if they have a home, by casting their vote, “none of above”. Voting and privacy must be a right with no price. Do you agree?
We can replace lawmakers refusing to audit the military, deny the cost, while supporting endless wars. We can
replace lawmakers who pamper the medical insurance industry, deny healthcare to the sick, diverting tax dollars.
We can replace lawmakers awarding bank bail outs, ignoring the tragedy of usury fees. We can replace lawmakers
giving tax breaks to big business not real job creators. It is the blood, sweat and tears of local owner operations that
keep main street together. We can replace lawmakers blindly fast tracking sovereignty shredding global trade agreements.
We have the information and understanding to recall, review, reinvent national defense. War is not the answer. We
want soldiers fl uent in Medicine, Education, Transportation, etc. We have the information and understanding to the
break the medical benefi t stranglehold, that ties us to the job. The immediate expansion of single payer Medicare,
everybody in, nobody out, provides for local governments, local farmers and families. I lament for the mothers,
whose babies should be born into a lifetime of healthcare. We have the information and understanding to tax with
authority, fi nancial transactions. The shuffl ing of money for profi t, does not trickle down. Nothing is more expensive
than being poor.
We have a lot of assets, let us talk about them. Post Offi ces, Newspapers, Radio, TV, our 4th estate, will no longer be
bought and sold. As planetary peacekeepers, our sacred charges, Mount Rainier, Lake Chelan and the Cascade Corridors, protected for posterity, from privatization. With grace and good fortune, we carry on. Amen.
For More Information:
(509) 248-9937
interstatelight@outlook.com
continued
3 5 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 8th Congressional District
Elected Experience: No information submitted
Other Professional Experience: Born in Seattle, Washington, Alida’s parents instilled the values of honesty, innovativeness, and the ethics of hard work. Alida Skold is a successful businesswoman in Washington and globally. She
founded the consulting fi rm, Global Consulting & Investments, Inc. that specializes in strategy, fi nance, and market
solutions. Alida served as a member of the World Affairs Council Board and drove the establishment of the Skold
Family Trust.
Education: B.A. in Business Administration and Information Systems, 1993 and Masters of Education in Leadership
and Policy, 2006 - University of Washington.
Community Service: Chair Public & Global Affairs Committee, Habitat For Humanity, Rotary
Statement: Alida Skold, a Democratic candidate for the U.S. Congress, is passionate about strengthening our region
through economic development, creating jobs, fi ghting for equality for all, and building sustainable 21st century
infrastructure. As your Representative, she would bring people together to negotiate and compromise to move
America forward as our founders intended. Alida’s experience in negotiations and global consulting and as a community leader, global & federal policy expert, and businesswoman has prepared her to be a passionate advocate
for the people. Alida will fi ght to keep America safe and work hard for the working families of Washington to create
family wage paying jobs that provide equal pay for equal work, continue the work for healthcare for all, support a
woman’s right to make her own health care decisions, fi ght for the rights of all, develop policies to fi ght addiction
to alcohol and drugs, work to strengthen Labor Unions, support public education, support our veterans, work hard
for senior citizens by protecting social security and Medicare, support the social safety net, protect our environment,
and create a modern defense force that protects America, and always seek real peace negotiations fi rst. Alida Skold
will create a Jobs Leadership Team by bringing together Labor Leaders, Business Leaders, Public Offi cials, Community Leaders and individuals interested in discussing ways to create jobs. President John F. Kennedy said: “I believe
in an America that is on the march - an America respected by all nations, friends and foes alike - an America that is
moving, doing, working, trying - a strong America in a world of peace.” Alida understands that America's leadership
in the world depends on its leadership here at home. As your Congresswoman Alida Skold can bring her experience
to be a progressive champion for the people of Washington’s 8th Congressional District.
For More Information:
(425) 557-4313
alida@alidaskoldforcongress.com
http://www.alidaskoldforcongress.com
Alida Skold
(Prefers Democratic Party)
continued
3 6 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 8th Congressional District
Tony Ventrella
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Elected Experience: PCO 41st Legislative District
Other Professional Experience: Host Seattle Seahawks, President Tony Ventrella Productions, Comcast Local Edition/News Makers, Sports Anchor KOMO TV, Sports Director KING-5 TV, Sports Director KIRO 7 TV, Host KIRO 710,
Sports Editor Wilton Bulletin, Sports Director WMMM/WDJF FM, Sports Director WNLK, Sports Director WANE TV,
US Army, Army Reserves, Village Barber Shop Barber
Education: Bellevue Community College, Norwalk Community College, Wright Technical, Wilton High
Community Service: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, ALS Foundation, Rebuilding Together Seattle, Boy Scouts of
America, Older Americans Conference, State Senate Employees Conference, Special Olympics, MADD, Children’s
Therapy Center, Elks Club, American Cancer Society, United Way, MDA
Statement: I’m Tony Ventrella, candidate for Congress. I’m not a politician, nor do I aspire to be. After 27 years in
local television, and then as online host for the Seattle Seahawks and Sounders FC, I’m seeking public offi ce to continue an extensive history of serving people.
For the past 30 years, I served Washington’s non-profi t community tirelessly. As a former member of the U.S. Army
and Army Reserves, I served this great country with pride. It’s time to serve my country once again.
I’m just a citizen, like you, stepping up to help our nation move forward. I’m more concerned with listening to the
people, rather than the big money interests groups who are splitting our country in half, slowing Congress to a halt.
If we want to see change in the world, we must be that change, and change in Congress starts with removing the
infl uence of big money in our democracy. Only then can we address the other pressing issues of the district, and the
country, ranging from climate change to immigration reform, from national security to saving social security, from
building sustainable economies for future generations to guaranteeing our veterans receive the benefi ts they need
when they need them.
Change does not come easy, it never has, but change is needed now more than ever. I plan to be an agent in bringing Congress together. We the people are disenchanted and tired of bickering between both sides. I pride myself
on building bridges and will spend more time in offi ce working for the people of this country and Washington's 8th
Congressional District, than away fundraising for the next campaign.
This is supposed to be an election, after all, not an auction. Each individual vote carries the same value, and I respectfully ask for yours.
For More Information:
(425) 691-0647
team@teamventrella.com
TeamVentrella.com
continued
3 7 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 8th Congressional District
Elected Experience: Precinct Committee Offi cer
Other Professional Experience: Intern for U.S. Senator Maria Cantwell; Chair of the Human Services Advisory Board
for the City of Kirkland; Member of the Governor’s Affi rmative Action Policy Committee; Real Estate fi rm Director of
Property Management; Founder , owner and designated broker of Red Rock Real Estate
Education: Masters of Business Administration, Western Washington University; B.A., University of Washington;
Lake Washington High School; Institute for a Democratic Future.
Community Service: Board member, University of Washington Multi-Cultural Alumni Partnership; Board member,
Salvation Army Eastside Corps; State Committeeman from the 48th Legislative District to the Washington State
Democratic Central Committee.
Statement: I believe the 8th Congressional District deserves a Representative that stands for the values of the district. We deserve a Representative that will raise the minimum wage, stand for workers’ rights; fi ght for equal rights,
including equal pay for women, protect our environment, make college more affordable, and serve as a champion
for our communities. We need to get this “do nothing” Congress back to work for the people!
I’m running for Congress to ensure that the opportunities that were available to me are available for all Americans.
We see these opportunities slipping away. We have a Congress that failed to improve the economy for all Washingtonians. We have a Congress that subsidizes corporations and billionaires while watching incomes decline for
ordinary Americans. We cannot afford more of the same over the next two years.
As a small business owner, I understand the needs, and know the value, that small businesses contribute to our
community and the economy. Congress must take action to pass the Marketplace Fairness Act and enact other reforms that currently force thousands of Washington businesses to compete at a disadvantage.
We need a Representative that will advocate for every member of our diverse and growing community. We need
a Representative that will address the security threats facing our nation. We need a Representative that promotes
investment in clean, renewable energy and brings green jobs to our district.
I came to this country as a boy, speaking no English, and achieved the American dream. As an American citizen, I
worked while attending college. My parents taught me, and my eight siblings, the values of hard work, integrity,
responsibility, and importance of helping others.
I have the sole endorsement of the King County Democrats and endorsement from your elected offi cials across the
district. I appreciate your vote.
For More Information:
(206) 595-8267
santiago@ramosforcongress.com
RamosforCongress.com
Santiago Ramos
(Prefers Democratic Party)
continued
3 8 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 8th Congressional District
Elected Experience: Seeking fi rst elected job
Other Professional Experience: Proud federal employee, NOAA
Education: Bachelor Science, Accountancy, University of Illinois
Community Service: I continue speaking out for fairness. Fairness includes: ranked choice voting; government and
businesses serving the people (not the reverse); quality schools; fair free global trade; not ending analog tv prematurely; clean alternative energy sources; supporting our troops and veterans economically and fi nancially; not starting the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan or bank bailout; immigration law enforcement focused on abusive employers;
progressive tax system for higher incomes; universal healthcare; ProLife (exceptions: rape, incest, signifi cant health
risk); UN-focused world unity; ending tyrant judges unconstitutionally bench legislating
Statement: Liars are destroying our Democracy and cheating to steal America. They've abused wealth to seize more
wealth and power and obstruct opposition (an argument for progressive taxation). They apply their double standards against you!
Liars get into elected offi ce to make all elected offi ces their entitlements and become internal domestic terrorists
(example: sabotaging transportation). They oppose entitlements for everyone else, but for themselves they want big
entitlements (welfare) such as lifelong government jobs and salaries, government provided healthcare and other
benefi ts, and taxpayer funded payoffs for their cronies. They provide government disservice then rig elections to
stay in offi ce. This is why the system is broken. They and their cronies are intentionally violating and breaking the
system to maintain abusive control and block your voice. Liars' biggest problem: Not everyone is dishonest nor can
be bribed, intimidated, scared, or terrorized.
Jobs will come from an economy based on fairness, not one based on entitlements for the top few only.
Note their election sabotage. Destroying the ballots of and denying registration to their opposition supporters.
When in offi ce, ignoring true ethics and creating false ethics and rules to keep opponents from running or voting
against them. Parties splitting the votes for opposing ideologies by planting stooge candidates who claim to support the ideology of opposing parties and independents. Across America in any election, if all the party and independent ideologies have more than one candidate but one party's ideology has only one candidate, then that's a
strong indication that political party is doing all the election planting, rigging, and sabotaging.
We must demand fairness! I will demand fairness as stated above in my Community Service.
I will make the fair choice, not the extreme right, extreme left, Republican, nor Democrat choice. If they disapprove, I
could not care less.
For More Information:
(253) 804-2513
email@votekeitharnold.com
www.votekeitharnold.com
Keith Arnold
(Prefers Independent///No Party)
end of office
3 9 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 9th Congressional District
Elected Experience: United States Representative, 1997-current; Washington State Senator, 1991-1997.
Other Professional Experience: Prosecutor, City of Seattle, 1993-1995; Attorney, Cromwell, Mendoza and Belur.
Education: J.D., University of Washington, 1990; B.A., Fordham University, 1987, Tyee High School, 1983.
Community Service: PTA member Issaquah High and Issaquah Middle School; Issaquah High School Booster Member; member, Borgen Project Board of Directors; Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission, member; attends Bellevue's St. Margaret's Episcopal Church; former volunteer coach, Issaquah Soccer Club; former member, Northeast
Tacoma Elementary PTA where my wife, Sara, served as PTA President for 2 years; former member, Federal Way
Kiwanis Club.
Statement: I grew up in the city of SeaTac, and have lived my entire life in the 9th District. This district is a tremendously diverse community that values hard work, and I am very proud to represent it. My wife Sara and I live in the
9th and raise our two children here, where they both attend public schools. As a Prosecutor, State Senator, Congressman, and member of our community, I live the values my parents taught—integrity, hard work, and respect for
our community.
Working class families, like the one I grew up in, do not have the same opportunities as previous generations. This
must change. That’s why I’m focused on strengthening the middle class, fi ghting for civil rights and equity, and
investing in our future. We need strong, experienced leadership to fi nd solutions to the challenges we face.
I remain absolutely committed to working hard to fi nd solutions to make our district better for all. We must grow
from the middle out, ensure there are more living wage jobs available, and make sure we continue to strive toward
equity and equality for all. As the top-ranked Democrat on the Armed Services Committee, I have always worked
hard to make sure that our servicemembers and their families, many of whom live in the 9th District, receive the
support they need and deserve.
I work hard every day to make sure every person in our district has access to the best this country has to offer; not
only because it’s the right thing to do, but also because this is my home—it’s personal to me, just like the prosperity
of our community is personal to you.
It is my honor to serve this district in Congress, and I ask for your vote.
For More Information:
(253) 572-6125
info@electadamsmith.com
www.electadamsmith.com
Adam Smith
(Prefers Democratic Party)
continued
4 0 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 9th Congressional District
Elected Experience: House of Representatives - Democratic Whip; House of Representatives - 43rd & 37th
Districts; Democratic National Committeemember (DNC); Precinct Committee Offi cer (PCO) - 43rd & 37th
Districts
Other Professional Experience: Attorney, U.S. Supreme Court Bar; MacDonald, Hoague & Bayless; ABC
News; U.S. Congress, Congressional Fellow - Washington, D.C. (1982); Film Producer
Education: Queen Anne High (1973); University of Washington (B.A., 1977); Seattle University Law School
(J.D, 1986); University of Ghana International Law School; Harvard University, John F. Kennedy School of
Government
Community Service: Church Council of Greater Seattle - Director; Central Area Motivation Program (CAMP)
- Director; Emerald City Community Bank - Director; Goodwill Baptist Church - Trustee; Alpha Phi Alpha
Fraternity
Statement: I'm Jesse Wineberry and I'm running for Congress because now more than ever, we need a
progressive new voice for the "New 9th" Congressional District. The "New 9th" was created by law as Washington's only district in which the majority of the residents are people of color, giving us the opportunity to
elect Washington's fi rst Democrat of color to Congress.
The billionaire special interests have had their voice in Congress for the last 20 years. The "New 9th" deserves a progressive new voice who will fi ght for all of us. Thanks to Mrs. Josephine Stokes, my 2nd grade
teacher who corrected a lisp in my speech in elementary school, I've been able to be a voice for the voiceless my entire live.
I'm an early Bernie Sanders caucus supporter, and the only candidate who brings to Congress a decade of
proven leadership in the House of Representatives, where I sponsored hundreds of legislation for the elderly, environment, income equality, education, clean energy and equal rights for all.
In Congress, I'll speak out against the "War of Hate" being waged against Mexicans, Muslims, Asians and
other minorities. I'll fi ght to raise the minimum wage; pass paid family-medical leave, enact equal pay for
equal work for women; save Social Security, protect credit unions, create tuition-free college education,
pass the Dream Act, enact Universal Health care, expand veterans' benefi ts and pass comprehensive immigration laws.
I'm proud to have the support of Ministers, Labor leaders, Democrats, Veterans, Republicans and Independents including Rev. Jesse Jackson, Dr. Samuel McKinney, Seattle City Council President Bruce Harrell,
Renton City Councilmember Ed Prince, Pastor Casey Treat and Sonya Freeman, wife of former State Representative Roger Freeman.
The "New 9th " deserves New representation. I ask for your Vote and I can't wait to be your Voice in Congress!
For More Information:
(425) 301-9672
info@jessewineberryforcongress.com
jessewineberryforcongress.com
Jesse Wineberry
(Prefers Democratic Party)
continued
4 1 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 9th Congressional District
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience: Telecommunications Infrastructure, Technician and Field Engineer since 1988; WA
Air National Guard (1988-97); GTE - Verizon (1996-2002); Installed Automated Weather Station Equipment at Air
Force bases worldwide (2002-2008); Laid off as big contract ended and recession hit (2008); Defense contractor,
ITT, Installed base-wide fi ber optic networks across Afghanistan (6/2009-3/2011). Combustion technician servicing
process furnaces for safety, effi ciency at steel mills across America (2011-Present)
Education: Woodway HS, Edmonds 1985Shoreline CC, Seattle 1985-87WWU, Bellingham 1988-90 (History, no
degree)
Community Service: Donor to Union Gospel Mission, Red Cross, Doctors without Borders, Goodwill
Statement: The biggest issue in the 9th and across America, is income inequality. Workers' pay has stagnated for
decades. The "middle class" is broken. Our buying power is equivalent to 1980.
Big corporations tout the need to improve productivity, streamline, and reduce ineffi ciencies. We all need to remember what this language often hides: "Ineffi ciencies" are people. And the savings from making such cuts, are usually
ferreted away to a few executives at the top. In line with Bernie Sanders' ideas, we will change this.
Campaign photos of yourself in a hardhat at a factory, and stories of your dad working at the airport, do not make
you a champion of labor. The incumbent has defended the failing status quo, trusting business against labor. He
supported fast track TPA and multiple trade agreements like TPP. I am with Labor every step of the way.
We live in my favorite place. Nature's beauty, and our local can-do spirit is why I will always call Seattle home. I live
in north Beacon Hill. My wonderful neighborhood is culturally and income diverse. The 9th is home to the world's
greatest wealth. There is no excuse for our failure to assist the dispossessed in our midst. Where can a solution to
poverty be found, if not here? We can and will.
Community safety, infrastructure, Transportation, Arts & Parks are priorities. My fi rst acts when elected: Thank
Bernie for waking us up; Then I will introduce a bill to grant amnesty to one of America's greatest heroes: Edward
Snowden. We owe him much, and he should be home. He is a brilliant technician, with a patriotic appreciation for
the values of the Constitution. That's who I want working for NSA. The revolution is under way!
Search "why hillary vs bernie matters more than people think"
For More Information:
(206) 406-0823
danielsmith9th@gmail.com
VoteDanSmith.com
Daniel Smith
(Prefers Democrat Party)
continued
4 2 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 9th Congressional District
Elected Experience: Twice elected PCO, worked on numerous political campaigns, 2nd time candidate for US Congress
Other Professional Experience: President and Founder of EZTVSpots.com Corporate Trainer for CARTOYS.Numerous retail sales and management positions
Education: Graduated From Central Valley HS Spokane Valley. Attended Multnomah University Portland OR
Community Service: Volunteer Youth Leader for over 30 years. Volunteer with The Rescue Mission, The Dream Center, The Salvation Army, and others serving the homeless and underprivileged.
Statement: Doug was born in Spokane WA. He was raised by a single mother and then later lived with his father, a
Teamster’s Union truck driver, in a mixed family. During High School He held down 3 jobs simultaneously and after
graduating worked in food service, construction, factory work, retail sales and as a professional musician. He has
been married, for over 30 years and has fi ve children. Doug is the founder and president of EZTVSpots.com and the
host of the radio program Eyes on Washington which airs on AM1590 The Answer in Seattle.
Doug is passionate about national defense. Today, America faces some of the greatest threats since the 1930s. It is
vital that we maintain vigilance and military readiness to deter those who would do us harm. And that we fulfi ll the
promises made to our service men and women, as well as our veterans.
Doug is committed to reduce the national debt. Our debt has grown so large that if interest rates were to go up to
4% the entire tax revenue could be consumed just paying the interest.
Doug is focused on building a strong, job creating economy, by creating an environment where businesses choose
America and Washington State fi rst. He will work to reform taxes so that you can keep more of your hard earned
wages.
Doug Basler is absolutely determined to listen to you and to represent you faithfully in Congress, not the special
interests or out of state donors. If you are ready for real change, and to have your voice heard in DC, then I urge you
to vote for Doug Basler for US House of Representatives. He is ready to roll up his sleeves and get to work day one!
For More Information:
(877) 427-6534
candidate@dougbasler.com
www.dougbasler.com
Doug Basler
(Prefers Republican Party)
continued
4 3 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 9th Congressional District
Elected Experience: None.
Other Professional Experience: Currently: an aspiring leadership author and nature photographer. Previously: selfemployed in direct sales and services, business operations manager for big 4 accounting fi rm, administrator for
community shelter and ministries as well as academic instructor and athletic coach, US Army medical administrative offi cer.
Education: Evangel University: Major, Psychology; Minor, Military Science.
Community Service: Active member of the American Legion Post 19 Honor Guard, ride leader for Christian Cycling,
participant in international medical and leadership development missions as well as Big Climb Seattle, member of
Christian Leadership Alliance, Washington Arms Collectors, Washington Trails Association and Pacifi c Northwest
Camaro Club.
Statement: The thoughts and values our founding fathers used to form our Constitution are equally as good for us
as it was for them; technology has changed our world but the hopes and dreams of each individual remain fi rmly
rooted in equal opportunity provided through individual freedom. Just as our forefathers cast off the heavy weight
of the English crown we must reverse a growing federal government that imposes its will upon local governments
and individuals, replacing freedom with regulation and diversity with conformity.
I believe that every individual and each party has valuable contributing ideals and beliefs for the betterment of our
country. Like a Constitutionalist I believe in the core philosophies that are within our founding documents and form
our Constitution as it is written. Like a Libertarian I believe that we should accept responsibility and therefore the
consequences of the choices we freely make. Like a Democrat I am deeply concerned for the welfare of others as
well as for our environment. Like a Socialist I am not opposed to governmental management of our nonrenewable
natural resources. Like a Republican I believe in responsible spending as well as empowering diverse state and
local governments. Ultimately I believe that the federal government should be the least of our governing bodies, it
should restrict itself to ensuring the common defense of each US citizen and guaranteeing equal opportunity for all
people who are and seek to be citizens of this country in education and business, today and tomorrow. This means
that we must have a strong national defense that is supported by an unequalled interstate infrastructure and unbreakable international network. It means that we must establish self-control today to ensure future generations
have access to freely seek opportunities without the burden of national debt and loss of resources.
For More Information:
(913) 353-6371
jcfl ener@jearyfl ener.com
www.jearyfl ener.com
Jeary Flener
(States No Party Preference)
end of office
4 4 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 10th Congressional District
Elected Experience: none
Other Professional Experience: Captain United States Air Force, rocket scientist and aerospace engineer, simulation
expert. Author of two books on health care and Social Security reform.
Education: BS mechanical engineering Purdue University, aircraft offi cers maintenance school, control systems
theory UCLA, business systems Alexander Hamilton Institute.
Community Service: Church council and treasurer Christ Lutheran Church, fund raising Tacoma rescue mission.
Statement: Jim has gained important experience running for this position for six years with 290,000 votes, which
has enabled him to come up with revolutionary solutions to important problems of our time. He has bills ready to
be enacted to reform Social Security and healthcare.
Social Security is in trouble because there is no investment. My new programs will make workers millionaires while
preserving existing benefi ts. This will be done by investing worker’s payroll taxes in a new Social Security Investment Trust for the benefi t of the worker, run by multiple wealth management companies; the same companies that
are making the rich rich, and in health insurance, life insurance and unemployment insurance providing a complete
fi nancial package. One trillion dollars a year will be invested in this program booming the economy and creating
jobs.
Immigration laws favor poor refugees who require welfare, while preventing skilled workers and business people
who can contribute to the economy from immigrating. We do not have enough jobs for low-paid workers while
highly skilled jobs do not have applicants. This system is creating ethnic diversity to the detriment of existing ethnic
groups.
Campaign fi nance is a pay-to-play system. Political candidates do not have the means to run for their elected offi ce.
They must accept contributions from special interest lobbyists. This is a lose-lose system as contributions will be
the in the thousand dollar range, but benefi ts conferred to lobbyists will be in the million and billion dollar range
paid for by our taxes. Candidates spent enormous amount of time on fund raising instead of doing their job, while
lobbyists and special interests get rich on our taxes.
Jim has a diverse family. He is married with three accomplished children and seven grandchildren. He has traveled
the world and likes people.
For More Information:
(253) 691-2979
jlpostma@yahoo.com
www.postma.com
Jim Postma
(Prefers Republican Party)
continued
4 5 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 10th Congressional District
Elected Experience: none
Other Professional Experience: Air Force enlisted, 1965-1969, Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel laborer, 1969-1974, Army
enlisted, 1974-1992, Retired military, 1992-2002, Federal Civil Service, 2002-2010, Retired.
Education: Graduate Rostraver High School, Bell Vernon, Pa. Graduate of Excelsior Collage.
Community Service: No information submitted
Statement: $19 trillion debt and counting. We're not the richest country in the world. There are no federal funds.
Federal funds is money taken from us to extort our compliance. Congress Sucks! with an approval rating below 10%
and inexplicably there's a 90% retention rate. Is it always the other 434? Think about it. We need to reform congress.
Norm Dicks collects more than $10,000 monthly congressional pension and makes millions more lobbying. Reynolds, Rostenkowski, Jackson Jr. all members of congress convicted of felonies in offi ce and still eligible for pensions. This is why these people will never submit a term limits amendment for our consideration. We have to drain
this swamp. Let's begin with: halving congressional salaries, eliminating all pay, benefi ts, allowances and extraordinary access for former elected and appointed offi cials. A modest start.
Look at some of the fed's failures despite limitless resources. The war on poverty, drugs and the border. They
passed welfare reform and there's more people on welfare than ever. They passed immigration reform and there're
more illegals than ever and illicit drugs fl ow across the border and the risk of terror is high. We have to enforce the
law and border. If I tell you I'll fi x education, housing, poverty etc. it's a lie. Nobody else will fi x it either. These are
matters co-opted by the national government better served by states. We must get back to The Constitution.We
must not allow the feds to use our money to extort our compliance. We have to take back our sovereignty and our
land.
My promise: the most informative and interesting two years in congressional history. Together we'll learn more
than we thought possible. Join me. I ask for your vote.
For More Information:
(253) 267-3724
richardaboyce@1791.com
Richard Boyce
(States No Party Preference)
continued
4 6 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 10th Congressional District
Elected Experience: Appointed Assistant Mayor Military Housing;Appointment by Governor; President UP Soccer.
Other Professional Experience: Counseling soldiers and veterans with PTSD, children, families, educating students.
As a small business owner Jennifer created many opportunities for employment.
Education: M.A. Phycology - Marriage and Family Therapy; B.A.. Liberal Arts Evergreen State College; Human Services- TCC Business Administration, Management, Computers and Military Sciences.
Community Service: From human sex traffi cking, domestic violence, and police brutality and deadly force to reducing our overwhelming homeless population, lobbying elected offi cials to acknowledge, enforce and protect our
rights. Jennifer has dedicated her career to fi ghting for children and families.
Statement: Congress needs Representatives who are progressive and will put people fi rst, not corporations which
is why we must End Citizens United. America prospers when its people prosper. Incumbents have done a poor job
at that.
As a woman, I have total say over my body, want to be paid a full dollar, and be protected from all forms of discrimination, domination, and persecution. As the wife of a Vietnam Veteran, mom of an Iraq Veteran, and having a son
currently serving, I know the cost of war and the pain families endure. I will take care of veteran's and families and I
will fi ght against war until all else has failed. The true cost of war surpasses the war itself.
Homeless is not acceptable, mental health is a real problem, drug addiction laws need changing, our senior's and
families must not have to endure home loss due to unscrupulous banks and mortgage companies. Seniors cola
needs to be calculated on current prices, not old standards which Congress continues to do.
All children need early childhood education, K-12, and secondary education for preparation in a global economy in
every Zip code without lifetime debt. Food, clothing, shelter, medical and dental are basic needs. Program development will move people from state dependent to self-suffi cient. Equal pay for equal work! An equitable tax structure
that allows small businesses to grow! Creating a green infrastructure for a safe environment and promoting union
apprenticeship programs. We need $15 an hour now.
Racial injustice, high school to prison pipeline, humane immigration and criminal justice need reform now!
I promise to represent the people and stand for the people with honesty, integrity, and an open door policy. My staff
and I will be available to you. I ask for your Vote!. Thank you!
For More Information:
(253) 282-9591
Jennifergigiferguson@comcast.net
VoteJenniferGigiFerguson.com
Jennifer Gigi Ferguson
(Prefers Democratic Party)
continued
4 7 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
U.S. Representative, 10th Congressional District
Elected Experience: U.S. Representative since 2013. State Representative, elected to fi ve terms. Chaired historic
Basic Education Subcommittee.
Other Professional Experience: Co-Founder, Intrepid Learning Solutions; Co-Founder and President, TVW – Washington’s version of C-SPAN; Chief of Staff, Governor Booth Gardner.
Education: B.A. - The Evergreen State College
Community Service: Denny and his wife of 40 years, Paula (a retired middle school principal), helped create the
Olympia School District Education Foundation's Principals' Emergency Checkbook Fund, providing low income children with supplies to be successful in school. Denny served on the Board of the Washington State Historical Society
and on the Washington Learns Commission.
Statement: It’s an honor serving you. Since my fi rst day in offi ce, I’ve focused on solving problems and building an
economy that works for all South Sound families. I believe people who work hard and play by the rules should be
able to get ahead.
We need to make sure the middle class and those working to get into it have a fair shot at a decent life. I championed new transportation funding that will complete SR-167, create jobs, and ease congestion around Joint Base
Lewis-McChord. I support raising the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour to help grow our economy. I’m fi ghting to make sure a woman’s right to choose is protected and women earn equal pay for equal work.
As the Representative of more than 80,000 veterans and thousands of servicemembers, I know we have a sacred obligation to those who serve in our armed forces. We need to keep holding the VA accountable for the services they
deliver, and we need to demand our veterans, military families and servicemembers get the support they’ve earned.
I will always look out for seniors. I oppose all efforts to turn Medicare into a voucher program or privatize Social
Security. We need to strengthen and preserve both of these commitments for future generations, not weaken them.
We must clean up and protect the Puget Sound. I’m leading the bipartisan effort to bring more federal attention and
resources to our local recovery efforts.
We cannot let loud and violent voices shape our nation’s politics. Bipartisanship is still possible if we focus on solving problems. Let’s start by getting dark money out of politics once and for all. Your vote is important. I would be
honored to earn it.
For More Information:
(360) 359-1514
info@dennyheckforcongress.com
http://www.dennyheckforcongress.com/
Denny Heck
(Prefers Democratic Party)
end of office
4 8 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
Goodspaceguy
(Prefers Republican Party)
Elected Experience: Goodspaceguy was elected to leadership in various fun, social organizations.
Other Professional Experience: Benefi ting from shared-living, Minnesota-born, amateur economist, investor, and
do-it-yourselfer Goodspaceguy has become prosperous.
Education: Being university educated in business, economics and other subjects in Germany, Sweden, and America,
has given Goodspaceguy a worldview.
Community Service: Traveling with our Sun inside our Milky Way Galaxy, amateur astronomer Goodspaceguy
thinks of our Earth as our “Spaceship Earth.” Former Boy Scout Goodspaceguy tries to improve our Spaceship
Earth in simple ways: like picking up litter and helping here and there. Professional amateur Goodspaceguy is a
Generalist.
Statement: Thank you to my more than 55,000 friends who voted for me, Goodspaceguy, in 2015. In our democracy, we, the people, build our living standard. We should now stop building the poverty-inducing welfare state, and
we should resume building our competitive, free market.
How? Stop voting for the big spenders who become the big taxers and growers of enormous, stifl ing government
that leads to high rents and high prices. Instead, vote for the small spenders so that the competitive, free market
segment of our economy can profi tably grow and hire more producers. Also, study economics, which tells us how
to operate our prosperity, movie, and poetry producing free market.
Unemployed people should reclaim the right to sell their own labor at bargain rates. Because the minimum wage
prevents some people from getting work, abolish the minimum wage. The minimum wage shrinks our exchange
economy, destroys jobs, increases crime, and increases homelessness. The minimum wage is a tool of force of the
always-out-of-balance, evil command-economy.
Defend the right of even losers and slackers to enter the work force and raise the living standard by selling their
labor at their low market value. Low loser wages will allow even criminals to get legal jobs. We need their help. As
losers work, many will learn and improve their skills and earning power. They will help produce more and more
goods and services … thus raising the living standard at lower, but profi table prices. Let’s turn losers and criminals
and welfare recipients into productive workers. Jobs reduce crime and panhandling. Let’s activate the power of the
market place to turn losers and criminals into winners in a low cost, low stress, free-parking, Washington State of
beautiful sky homes. Let’s build a free market Utopia.
For More Information:
(206) 601-8172
goodspaceguy42@yahoo.com
www.colonizespace.blogspot.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
4 9 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
Bill Hirt
(Prefers Republican Party)
Elected Experience: No information submitted.
Other Professional Experience: My appreciation of the benefi ts from public transit was fostered by commuting
primarily by bus during my last 15 years at Boeing. After retiring I traveled extensively throughout UK and Europe
where I experienced how transit works in London and all the major cities in Europe. Last year I "experienced" subways in New York and Toronto. Unfortunately Sound Transit refuses to recognize the limits imposed on light rail
by the Seattle tunnel prevent the Prop 1 extensions from ever having the capacity needed to replicate those transit
systems.
Education: BS (1961), MS (1962), Engineering, Iowa State University
Community Service: No information submitted.
Statement: My candidacy is an attempt to emulate the little girl in the Hans Christian Anderson fable telling the villagers the "King has no clothes". That contrary to what the "weavers" (Sound Transit and WSDOT) and the "wise
men" (the media, city councils, many legislators, and others) tell the "villagers" (the rest of us) light rail is no "magic
carpet". That, unlike BART, the Seattle tunnel limits light rail capacity to the point where none of the Prop 1 extensions will have the capacity needed to signifi cantly reduce the area's congestion.
It's the culmination of an effort that began more than 7 years ago to expose the fantasy in the Sound Transit/WSDOT East Link 2008 DEIS. It's evolved into critiques of all of Sound Transit's Prop 1 light rail extensions and their
failure to address the area's congestion problems. The ST3 vote this fall for projects that don't begin until 2023
"suggests" Sound Transit needs the funds for Prop 1 despite claims to the contrary. Rejecting ST3 may force Sound
Transit to "reconsider" the extensions. My goal is to convince the "villagers" to do just that.
I urge voters from throughout the state who care about congestion to visit my blog http://stopeastlinknow.blogspot.
com. Since its inception the more than 300 posts have attracted more than 34,000 page views without a single
serious rebuttal. The posts opine not only about the ST/WSDOT "weavers" but the "wise men" who, if not cheering
them on, have quietly acquiesced.
They provide details as to why the current Prop 1 extensions won't work and how for a fraction of the time and
money BRT could provide public transit that allows far more commuters to leave their cars near where they "live"
rather than where they "work", reducing congestion for everyone.
For More Information:
(425) 747-4185
wjhirt2014@gmail.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 0 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
Mary Martin
(Prefers Socialist Worker Party)
Elected Experience: None.
Other Professional Experience: None
Education: Experience as an industrial worker facing grinding economic depression conditions from capitlaism's
deepening crisis.
Community Service: Chair, Washington Socialist Workers Party. Fights for labor solidarity, Black rights, women's
equality, and defense of the Cuban Revoluton, an example for working people. Organized solidarity for the International Longshore Workers Union locked out by EGT in Longview, backs organizing efforts by farmworkers in Skagit
Valley. I grew up in a military family and lived in the Jim Crow south, fi ghting racist discrimination. I protested U.S.
wars in Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan. I support a woman's right to choose abortion.
Statement: Capitalism is in crisis. The Democratic and Republican Party candidates seek to rescue the bosses from
their deepening economic, social, moral crisis. I say working people need to overthrow the dog-eat-dog capitalist
system and take political power.
The ruling capitalist families use Washington’s economic and military forces to protect their investments and interests abroad. The Socialist Workers Party speaks out against Washington’s imperialist wars — from Iraq, Afghanistan
to Syria.
The SWP strives to advance class-consciousness and self-confi dence of workers as we fi ght together. We fi ght
within the ranks of labor to transform our unions into effective fi ghting instruments. We’re part of the fi ght for $15
and a union; for a government-funded public works program to create jobs and build schools, hospitals, childcare
and recreation centers, replace crumbling infrastructure and pipes fi lled with lead laced water our children drink,
and other things working people need; the fi ght against Puerto Rico’s colonial status; for free medical care for all; to
fi ght against deportations of immigrant workers; to defend a women’s right to abortion; to demand cops who kill or
brutalize working people are prosecuted.
We back the effort to free Dwight and Steven Hammond, Oregon ranchers framed on trumped-up arson charges.
We demand the arrest of FBI and Oregon cops who killed Robert LaVoy Finicum, a rancher who occupied the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge to protest the Hammonds imprisonment.
As Malcolm X said, workers “fi nd their self-worth” through these struggles, becoming capable of changing the
world. The Cuban Revolution is an example of this for working people. End Washington’s economic embargo
against Cuba!
Join the fi ght to overturn the dictatorship of capital, build a new society based on human solidarity and join the
worldwide fi ght for socialism — a life truly worth living.
For More Information:
(206) 323-1755
seattleswp@qwestoffi ce.net
www.themilitant.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 1 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
Steve Rubenstein
(Prefers Independent Party)
Elected Experience: I have not previously run for offi ce.
Other Professional Experience: Founded fi rst company in college to develop CRM and later auction software. Sold it
in 2001. Cofounded second company in 2000. Like LendingTree, but for business and commercial real-estate loans.
Focused on consulting recently to spend time with my children.
Education: Graduated from The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania with dual concentrations in Entrepreneurial Management and Information Systems, 1996.
Community Service: Coached startups and nonprofi ts for competition for socially-oriented companies. Volunteered
with Sierra Club for coal export terminal hearings. Six years as President of neighborhood HOA. PTA Dad!
Statement: I am running for Governor because I no longer have any faith that the other candidates (or the parties
themselves) have both the courage and the heart to truly solve the challenges faced by this State.
Washington has the most regressive tax structure in the nation, which disproportionately hurts low-income residents and causes State revenue to plummet during a recession. Education and mental health are woefully underfunded. The current education funding method creates signifi cant differences in school quality, leading to continued
income disparity. Neither candidate has a plan to address these issues, nor has an attempt even been made by
either party!
To fully fund education and other programs, we need an income tax and capital gains tax on upper-income residents. This will provide more stable revenue and enable us to lower the sales tax to help low-income residents. We
also need to raise the minimum wage. No one who works full-time should be unable to meet their basic needs.
I am a treehugger. But instead of getting distracted by an idealistic carbon tax, I will focus on issues that directly impact residents, such as poisoning of our air, land and waterways. Despite our environmental image, the federal EPA
actually admonished the State for not setting a reasonable standard for polluting salmon-bearing streams!
Other priorities include providing free access to (taxpayer-owned) State Parks and reforming drug laws to treat
drugs as a public health issue, not a criminal issue -- which only leads to violence and racially-disproportionate
mass incarceration. To ensure proper representation for all citizens, particularly minorities, local governments
should move away from at-large voting to geographically-defi ned districts.
I live in Snohomish County in Bothell with my wife, two dogs and two children. I respectfully ask for your support.
For More Information:
(206) 250-7655
steve@steverubenstein.com
www.SteveRubenstein.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 2 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
David W. Blomstrom
(Prefers Fifth Republic Party)
Elected Experience: No information submitted
Other Professional Experience: Worked as wildlife biologist for U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, North Slope Borough
Environmental Protection Offi ce and Alaska Dept. of Fish & Game. Also worked for National Park Service and as a
teacher for the Seattle School District.
Education: B.S. in applied ecology from Western Washington University/Huxley; wildlife classes at University of
Alaska; educational experiences also include political activism, campaigns for public offi ce, writing, research and
web design.
Community Service: I’ve served the community as a whistle-blower, activist and educator, largely through my websites (based at www.gebop.com) and political activism.
Statement: Jewarchy. Merely adding that word to your vocabulary makes my campaign a success. If you’re bothered by the U.S. government giving billions of dollars to Israel - an illegitimate terrorist state - or Obama giving millions to wealthy alleged Holocaust survivors while snubbing homeless Americans or survivors of the ongoing Native American Holocaust, then you already have an idea what I’m talking about. Learn more at www.jewarchy.com.
Better yet, begin with www.geobop.com/politix-101 and a peek at www.davidblomstrom.com. Then ask "Why do
no other candidates, politicians or 'activists' have a comparable track record and online resume or care enough to
educate the public?"
I’m a veteran who does not support the troops, a former teacher who blew the whistle on my own employer and a
former wildlife biologist who knows that Bill Gates doesn’t have a clue about education, feeding the hungry or anything else except making crappy software.
I also coined the term Seattle Mafi a, showcased at www.seattlemafi a.com. Washington’s de facto capital, Seattle is
little more than a cancer cell, a playpen for corporate tycoons and shallow yuppies.
Even if all you care about are higher taxes and Seattle’s skyrocketing rent, how are you going to fi x things if you
don’t even recognize the root of the problem? Clue: How much taxes do Bill Gates, Boeing and Amazon pay? Who’s
the leading spokesman for genetically modifi ed food? Who controls Seattle (and therefore Washington State)?
Bill Gates. Yet how many politicians, candidates and “activists” have one word to say about Gates?
As Carl Sagan said, “Don’t sit this one out. You are by accident of fate alive at an absolutely critical moment in the
history of our planet.” Viva la revolucion! www.governor5.com
For More Information:
geobop1@gmail.com
www.governor5.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 3 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
Johnathan Dodds
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Elected Experience: Founder of OFFICESUPPLYSTORE.COM and Obfucscat Technology. Operating since 1997. Former Professional Wrestling Star known as Johnathan Holliday. My experience in negotiating and operating successful international companies enables me to put forth proposals for legislation that will insure that Washington State
lves free and continues to be a driving force in the Global Market Place. I know the Pacifi c Northwest by the back of
my hand. Microsoft, Boeing, Amazon and Alaska Air are just the beginning.
Other Professional Experience: No information submitted
Education: No information submitted
Community Service: No information submitted
Statement: The Washington State economy isn't the issue. Washington State has the best economy in the Nation.
It has had the best economy in the nation consistently regardless of who is the Governor. How to manage the social
pressures that are derved and suppressed are the issues. It is my intention to free up the people of Washington from
the suppressive measures put in place as legislation. Freeing up the people of Washington State so they can manage the critical issues of their lives without having to abide by a judicial system that is currently being withheld from
them in many aspects.
For More Information:
(425) 502-6880
jmdodds@outlook.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 4 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
Patrick O'Rourke
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Elected Experience: I was a precinct Bernie Sanders delegate and went to the County convention.
Other Professional Experience: 35 years with Clark Public Utilities as an IBEW Union Journeyman Lineman, Journeyman Meterman, Journeyman Relay Tech and the Protection and Control Foreman
Education: Attended Vancouver Public Schools and Clark College in Vancouver and completed three Union apprenticeships while at Clark Public Utilities and attended the Washington State University Relay School in Pullman
Community Service: "Stream Team" streambank enhancement program for Clark county streams to help make the
recovery of native fi sh possible. Clark County food drives, Ridgefi eld, Camas, Battle Ground and Vancouver Christmas lights. School electrical safety demonstrations
Statement: Working for Clark Public Utilities for 35 years gives me great insight on how a public agency can be by
the people, for the people and win 7 JD Powers awards in a row for quality. It is one of the fi nest in the country. It
shows me that unions and management can live in harmony and provide superior customer service and power at a
reasonable price compared to for profi t utilities.
I have also learned about being able to raise a family and buy a home with a union job and the benefi ts a union provides. I would like to see my children Emily and Keenan able to prosper in our state like I have. As governor I will
represent the people fi rst and always and won't forget who I work for.
The environment, education, human rights, economic justice and freedoms that are important to Washingtonians
are necessary to a future where we can all coexist and have a balance that has been lacking economically and socially. We have been sacrifi cing for too long so those few at the top can get a few more breaks that they don't need
but have the political clout to get in our system.
As a 4th generation resident of our great state I will be honored to represent everyone. I have been motivated by recent events to get involved and show that because our country was built by normal everyday people that everyday
people can still get involved in state government and make a difference!
For More Information:
(360) 609-0748
patfromamboy@aol.com
patrickforwashington.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 5 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
Christian Pierre Joubert
(Prefers Holistic Party)
Elected Experience: In the academic & spiritual realms.
Other Professional Experience: Worked in multiple institutes & universities in the law, medicine, public health, ecology & holistic agriculture. Expertise in cancer research, wine therapy, clinical nutrition, acupuncture, naturopathy,
gerontology, neurpscience, law, diplomacy, International relations. Documentary maker (holistic oncology, sustainability & longevity). Superfood organic energy bar producer. Professor of International law in Europe & Gonzaga
Law School (Spokane) where I established the School's International human rights law program (1991).
Education: Law, Medicine, Acupuncture, Nutrition, Sociology, Ecology, Agriculture.
Community Service: Legal and educational contributions to encourage tobacco, food, medical, judicial & governmental leaders to embrace holistic approach to business.
Statement: Like thousands of Washingtonians, my parents were sacrifi ced on the altar of today's cancer medicine.
Inspired to help similarly misguided patients, I mindfully litigated for many years in Washington and Federal jurisdictions to change outdated medical standards.
During the 2008 gubernatorial campaign, my holistic message was well received: "The best speaker of the evening -
judging from audience reactions - was Christian Pierre Joubert who is running for Governor. His issues were health
and prosperity but it was how he spoke to us that got us with him in just two minutes" (Northwest Citizen Journal).
On election day, I was surprised to see that my holistic platform emerged as the third political force of the State.
In 2012, I followed up with a better holistic program and publicly debated governor Jay Inslee (at Seattle's Stranger
newspaper). The subsequent events showed that my program was the most relevant one.
However, Washington's mainstream media silenced my holistic program while the Republican-Democratic legislature unconstitutionally blocked the State's printed primary voters pamphlet funding. Likewise in 2016.
I was therefore inspired to create a new Consciousness movement, the Holistic Party, as a unifying tool to restore
the People's wholeness, basic needs, informed consent & political sovereignty. As the Nation's fi rst Holistic Governor, I would thus promote holistically-inspired executive orders, regulations and nominations that would reverse
chronic stress, diseases, corruption, pollution, debt, bureaucracy & plutocracy by over 80 percent within 4 years,
thanks to which the State will have enough resources to ensure equal access to wellbeing, prosperity & justice. We
will also build a magnifi cent "New Era" Statue of Holistic Responsibility and to offer all Washingtonians a joyful one
week "health-spa vacation" each year. See holisticparty.org for the evidence that supports Holistic Governance as
the ultimate remedy to today's failed politics.
For More Information:
(206) 446-6079
christian@holisticparty.org
http://holisticparty.org
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 6 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
James Robert Deal
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Elected Experience: No information submitted
Other Professional Experience: Real estate broker. Real estate, consumer protection, and environmental attorney
since 1978
Education: University of Washington Law School, J.D. 1978; Western Washington University B.A, M.Ed. 1973; Anglican Theological College 1971; Abilene Christian University 1970; Harding University B.A., 1969
Community Service: President and webmaster of Fluoride Class Action, an association of attorneys and scientists
who study and debate the effectiveness, risks, and legal and scientifi c aspects of fl uoridation and topical applications of fl uoride such as toothpaste and dental gels. See: www.Fluoride-Class-Action.com/Safewater
Statement: Amend the Washington Constitution: Prohibit any income tax on the bottom 90%. Require an income
tax on the top 10%. Fully fund education. Establish single payer health care, eliminating deductibles, as Colorado is
doing. Phase in a $15 minimum wage. Capitalism must work for all. Eliminate traffi c congestion: Take half the solo
drivers off the roads, cut greenhouse gasses, with a statewide, UberX cell driven, ride sharing and door to door van
service. Vans would carry you to and from home, transit centers, work, ferries, car rental, school, shopping, and soccer practice, connecting our disconnected, wasteful, transit system, making transit faster than driving. Price vans by
the mile to break even. Vans will fi ll up, especially at night, will be more secure, will feed passengers to buses and
trains, increasing ridership and revenues, freeing up money to complete light rail. A six passenger van equal fi ve
cars off the roads. Sell one car and save $724 per month. Owning a car will be optional. Enact a gasoline tax to complete light rail within six years. Establish a Washington State Bank, like the profi table North Dakota bank. Foment
investment. Reduce the cost of bond borrowing. Make Washington an organic state. Ban salmon killing carcinogenic
Roundup. Farmers will prosper selling organic products worldwide. Stop adding lead leaching, toxic waste fl uoride
fi lth to water. Ban mercury vaccines. Ban coal trains for littering mercury coal dust, oil trains as unreasonably dangerous. House the homeless, the right thing to do, cheaper than alternatives. Treat addiction as a health problem.
Build gigabyte internet as Mount Vernon is doing. I am a green, progressive, New Deal Democrat, unlike the many
elected Wall Street Democrats. My scientifi c and legal knowledge and goals are more important than my opponents'
experience at maintaining the status quo.
For More Information:
(425) 771-1110
james@jamesdeal.com
www.JamesRobertDeal.org
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 7 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
Jay Inslee
(Prefers Democratic Party)
Elected Experience: Washington State House of Representatives 1989-1992 representing Yakima Valley; U.S. House
of Representatives 1993-1994 representing Eastern Washington; U.S. House of Representatives 1999-2012 representing Kitsap, King and Snohomish Counties; Washington State Governor 2013–present.
Other Professional Experience: Attorney; Author, Apollo’s Fire: Igniting America’s Clean Energy Economy.
Education: Ingraham High School, Seattle, WA; graduated University of Washington with a B.A. in economics, 1972;
graduated Magna Cum Laude from Willamette University Law School, 1976.
Community Service: Charter member of Hoopaholics to raise money for Childhaven; coached youth sports; served
as honorary board member of the Washington Wildlife and Recreation Coalition.
Statement: Over the last three years I’ve worked hard as governor to help build a stronger economy. We’ve created
over 250,000 jobs, been recognized as the nation’s best economy by Business Insider and seen the lowest unemployment rate since 2008.
When tragedy struck, we reopened the Skagit River I-5 Bridge in 27 days. We worked with courageous people devastated by the Oso slide, comforting victims and rebuilding communities. We took action to assist those impacted by
wildfi res in Central and Eastern Washington.
As a state we need to give our children access to a world-class education in an economy that demands new skills -
I’m confi dent we can do this. Every child now has access to all-day kindergarten, we have smaller class sizes in early
grades, and better paid and trained teachers. And we made an unprecedented tuition cut at all public colleges and
universities across Washington.
We know we need big improvements in our transportation system. That’s why I was adamant the legislature pass a
bipartisan package that creates 200,000 jobs, repairs bridges, creates new lanes, expands bus service and opens the
door to expanding light rail. While it will not fi x everything overnight, it puts us on the right path while we address
bottlenecks and fi nd practical solutions.
When it comes to basic Washington values, we will not waiver. We’ll protect children from the ravages of carbon
pollution that cause asthma and climate change. We will work for an economy that builds a stronger middle class by
raising the minimum wage, ensuring paid sick leave and advancing policies that allow working families to thrive.
I’m proud of our progress. With your vote, I’m confi dent we can harness our state’s unique innovative spirit, and
build a stronger economy and more prosperous future for every Washingtonian.
For More Information:
(206) 533-0575
Jay@JayInslee.com
www.jayinslee.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 8 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Governor
Bill Bryant
(Prefers Republican Party)
Elected Experience: Commissioner, Port of Seattle
Other Professional Experience: Founder, Bryant Christie Inc., a company that helps farmers export (1992-present).
Vice President, Northwest Horticultural Council (Yakima, 1985-92). Director, Governor’s Council on International
Trade (1984-85).
Education: Georgetown University, School of Foreign Service (B.S.F.S., trade/diplomacy, Asia/Latin America)
Community Service: Volunteer night manager, St. James shelter for homeless men (2004-06). Founding board
member, Nisqually River Foundation. Former board member of Stewardship Partners, Washington Council on
International Trade, Spokane International Trade Alliance. Member, Governor Gregoire’s transportation task force.
Rotary (Olympia, Yakima, Seattle). 2010 Maritime Public Offi cial of the Year.
Statement: I listen, and I’ve heard loud and clear what people want. They want a government that cares about them.
They want a governor who is effective -- a unifi er, not a career politician. They want a governor who will scrutinize
programs, fi x broken bureaucracies, respect our tax dollars. They want a governor who will focus on children learning, traffi c moving, prisons working; on controlling taxes and protecting our environment.
My background is in business. I built a company that operates on both sides of the mountains, that helps Washington’s farmers export their crops. I pull people together and fi x problems.
As an elected King Co/Seattle port commissioner, I cut taxes without sacrifi cing services; helped transform government to defend middle class jobs; focused on tourism, transportation, reducing air and water pollution and restoring
habitat. I was recognized for taking on ‘crony capitalism’.
Here’s what I’ll do as your governor: 1. Give every kid an equal chance to get ahead by funding and innovating
schools. 2. Reinvent high school by including pre-apprenticeships for those not college-bound. 3. Reduce traffi c
jams by emphasizing capacity, better roads and effi cient transit. 4. Rebuild the state budget from zero, reexamining
every agency, tax incentive and program. 5. Put a moratorium on new regulations until current ones are justifi ed or
eliminated. 6. Preserve working farms and forests; restore salmon, steelhead and orca populations.
My agenda isn’t ideological, it’s not partisan. It’s about us, pulling together, so people can get good jobs here, afford
houses, raise families and retire here in this natural beauty we all love and want to protect.
Imagine a governor who works with both Republicans and Democrats, who makes government better, not bigger.
It’s time government listened. It’s time we pull together and start getting stuff done. It’s time.
For More Information:
(253) 220-5051
info@billbryantforgovernor.com
www.BillBryantforGovernor.com
end of office
Video
Voters'
Guide
5 9 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Lieutenant Governor
Marty McClendon
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Precinct Committee Offer 26-335, 26th LDRC
President 2012-2014
Other Professional Experience:
Anesthesia Technician 1987-2000,
Small Business Owner/Entrepreneur, Pastor 2002-Present, Real Estate Managing Broker 1999-Present, Radio
Talk Show Host 2015-Present
Education: Attended University of Washington- PreMedicine, Anesthesia Technician Training and certifi -
cation, Biblical and Polity Training and certifi cate for
Pastoring, Mortgage Brokers training and license, Life
Insurance license, Real Estate Managing Brokers training
and license and thousands of hours of continuing education. Sales training with negotiation and presentation.
Community Service: Boys and Girls Club, Make A Wish
Foundation, Rotary, Leukemia Foundation, little league,
and World Vision.
Statement: As a World Peace Ambassador, I believe
now is the time for Bold, Conservative Leadership with
a vision for bringing the people of this state together in
unity as one Washington. We must tackle the challenges we face, so that we can launch our state on a path
for long term success. It is time to honor our veterans,
improve the business environment, clean up job killing
regulations, improve education, promote strong families
and safe communities and provide a healthy dose of
common sense to the way we approach issues.
I was raised with values including: keeping your word,
loving your neighbor, and the value of hard work. I
earned my Eagle Scout which instilled: trustworthiness,
honesty, bravery, and love of Country. As a lifetime
Resident of both Eastern and Western Washington, Host
of Eyes on Washington, business owner, and father of
3, I am passionate about leaving a stronger Washington
for the generations to come.
As your Lieutenant Governor, I will advocate for winwin solutions, hold government accountable, stand
for Truth, Fight for Justice, defend against any takings
of your lands, rights, or freedoms, and implement the
Golden Rule. See my website at www.ElectMarty.com
for details. God Bless!
For More Information:
(206) 818-4308
info@electmarty.com
www.ElectMarty.com
Mark Greene
(Prefers Citizens Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Never elected
to political offi ce, but founder &
chair of Revived Citizens Party,
Democracy in Election Process Organization, and Respect for Mother
Nature of Washington Committee.
Other Professional Experience: Legal Assistant: independent presently, but formerly worked for several
prestigious law fi rms. Veteran of U.S. Armed Services:
U.S.M.C. (active duty from 1972 to 1974; honorable
discharge).
Education: Inver Hills College in State of Minnesota,
A.A.S. Degree.
Community Service: Puget Sound Blood Center (newly
called Bloodworks Northwest). My organizations have
registered or re-enrolled at least a thousand new voters
over the years, and educate voters about government.
Statement: Toppling the Two Party Custom: The Revived Citizens Party, an America-centric party, works
for the Common Man, believes in practical budgeting;
maintaining the no income tax policy; infrastructure &
environmentally conscious. Personally crafted some
wording for GMO Labeling initiatives.
Voting for the 2 major parties just gets us the status quo.
Even President Theodore Roosevelt ran with "3rd party"
(1912). Not all 3rd parties are good, e.g., the Libertarians
aren't friendly to social security, unemployment compensation, etc.
Thanks to 123,000-plus unique voters of Washington
who voted for me over the years. With this crowded
fi eld, your votes this time could easily put me in "Top 2,"
including nearly 6000 in Federal Way who had me within
arms distance of the Council, and to all insurgent voters in Washington for doing their best to get a people's
political order.
Washingtonians won't be able to use regular ID to get
into government buildings & airports, soon, thanks to
globalization-obsessed legislators, some running for
lieutenant governor, and now are presently considering expanding nuclear energy in Washington despite all
the ills that nuclearization has caused (Hanford), other
U.S. (Three Mile Island), and other lands (Chernobyl &
Fukushima).
For More Information:
(253) 874-0103
poc_senator@yahoo.com
www.revivedcitizensparty.us
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
6 0 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Lieutenant Governor
Phillip Yin
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: No information
submitted
Other Professional Experience:
Global journalist from Q13 Fox,
CNBC Television, Bloomberg News,
and CCTV America. Appointed to the Citizen's Oversight Committee for Sound Transit. Worked for Charles
Schwab, UBS, and Oppenheimer. Vice Chairman of the
Committee of China Business for the American Chamber
of Commerce. Member of the Washington State U.S.
China Relations Council.
Education: Eisenhower High School in Yakima, University of Washington, Harvard Business School, Minority
Summer Program. International MBA from Georgetown
University.
Community Service: Founder of the Phil and Friends
American Dream Scholarship at UW. Member of President's Club at the University of Washington. Member of
Asian American Journalist Association.
Statement: "I will work hard to prevent a state income
tax and support free markets. Voters have said the status quo is unacceptable and new leadership is needed.
I will ensure fairness and keep taxes low so you keep
more of your paycheck."
Phillip is passionate, qualifi ed, and ready. As an investigative journalist, Phillip defended the freedom of speech
and covered stories from 9/11 to the fi nancial crisis. He's
asked hard questions of politicians and CEOs focusing
on the truth. After the fi nancial crisis, Phillip successfully led the fi ght helping bank customers and retirees
recover $1.8 billion for 43,000 people. He has the experience and character to fi ght for us!
Phillip will work with community leaders to create jobs,
fi nd solutions to our transportation mess, and prioritize
improving our schools. As a father of three girls, these
are his personal priorities.
He'll expand opportunities in Eastern and Western
Washington by leading on trade and development. He
is a strong supporter of fi scally responsible leaders
including Rob McKenna, Dino Rossi, and Congresswoman Cathy McMorris Rogers. Phillip is grateful to be
endorsed by numerous current and formerly elected
offi cials for his dedication and strong family values.
#YinItToWinIt!
For More Information:
(206) 910-8890
info@phillipyin2016.com
www.phillipyin2016.com
Steve Hobbs
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Steve Hobbs
has served in the State Senate
for 10 years, fi ghting to fully fund
public education, grow the economy, address social and economic
inequality – while promoting a civil
dialogue and working across party lines in the legislature to bring about bipartisan solutions.
Other Professional Experience: 27 years of service in the
Army and National Guard; deployed to Kosovo and Iraq;
currently is Commander of Joint Forces Headquarters
Washington Army National Guard.
Education: Steve worked his way through college, earning his Associate degree from Everett Community College and his Masters of Public Administration from the
University of Washington.
Community Service: Rotary, American Legion, Nisei
Veterans Committee.
Statement: Steve has dedicated his life to public service,
including over twenty years of military service. He’s
running for Lieutenant Governor to continue his fi ght to
fully fund the public schools his three children attend,
grow the state economy and champion accountability
and results in state government. As chief Democratic negotiator on the Senate Transportation Committee, Steve
worked across party lines to pass the fi rst transportation
package in over a decade.
In addition to presiding over the Senate, the Lieutenant
Governor leads the state government when the Governor is unavailable. The Lieutenant Governor initially led
emergency response during the Oso landslide and last
year’s devastating fi res. As a commander in the Army
National Guard, Steve Hobbs is the only candidate with
fi rsthand experience in emergency management.
“Steve Hobbs has the experience, training and judgment
needed to support the Governor in times of crisis and to
provide decisive leadership when serving as acting Governor,” said former Washington National Guard Major
General (Ret.) Tim Lowenberg.
Endorsed by unions including State Troopers Association, State Building Trades, Public School Employees and
Governor Gary Locke. Supported by Washington businesses including Boeing, Microsoft and Weyerhaeuser.
Steve, his wife Pam and their three boys live in Snohomish County.
For More Information:
(425) 334-5524
info@electhobbs.com
www.electhobbs.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
6 1 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Lieutenant Governor
Karen Fraser
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Senator,
Thurston County, 6 terms; former
State Representative, 2 terms; former Thurston County Commissioner, 2 terms; former Lacey Mayor
and City Council Member
 (fi rstwoman).
Other Professional Experience: Washington State Association of Counties, President (fi rst woman); The Evergreen State College, Adjunct Faculty, Master of Public
Administration Program. Leader of state international
friendship and trade delegations to Asia.
Education: University of Washington: BA and Master of
Public Administration; Yale University Summer Language Institute; Roosevelt High School, Seattle.
Community Service: Boy Scouts of America, Tumwater
Council, former Vice President and Treasurer; Washington-Hyogo (Japan) Sister State 50th Anniversary Celebration, Chair; Nisqually RiverBasin Task Force.
Statement: Experience matters.
Karen Fraser is the only candidate with extensive state,
city, and county government, and state level international relations experience. A six-term State Senator, she
has been a major, progressive leader for budget, policy,
parliamentary debate, and Senate administration. She
was a Thurston County Commissioner, the fi rst woman
President of the Washington State Association of Counties, and the fi rst woman Mayor of Lacey.
She would become the fi rst woman Lt. Governor-
--achieving better representation of our population. She
will not seek higher offi ce, and will focus on doing this
job well. Presiding over the Senate is the top duty of the
Lt. Governor. She would be a leader to promote civility,
respect, and ethics. Her top priority: promote prosperity that benefi ts every person in the state. This includes:
social and economic justice for all, family wage jobs,
fully funding K-12 needs, reducing student debt, achieving clean air and water, addressing climate change,
investing in infrastructure, assuring a safety net for the
vulnerable, and assuring that government works FOR
the people.
Endorsements: three former Senate Presidents Pro Tem,
labor unions, Democratic groups, progressive organizations, WA Women's Political Caucus, over 40 current
and former legislators and statewide offi cials.
For More Information:
(425) 345-5778
info@KarenFraserForLtGovernor.com
KarenFraserforLtGovernor.com
Bill Penor
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: No political
baggage
Other Professional Experience: 21
years experience in Airport/Aerospace industry and served as Vice
President, Washington Airport Management Association; Business development WBA - Member;American
Association of Airport Executives - Certifi ed Member;
Aircraft Rescue Fire Fighter - Certifi ed; Additional experience in the fi elds of Timber Management, Construction,
Marine Trades
Education: GED
Community Service: Narbeck Wetland Sanctuary - Board
Member
Statement: Today Washington is faced with diffi cult issues that did not occur over night. Due to lack of vision
its time for change, change fi lled with critical thinking
and new ideas to move Washington forward.
Where others see dead ends I see opportunities such as
joining education with business and industry to assist in
training our young adults for the journey in to adulthood
and closing the education, earnings, and racial gaps
so that all in Washington can rise together and soften
the burden on the tax payers who work so hard to get
ahead.
Grid continues to plague our roadways, poor management and cost overruns impacting our economy and
productivity, it is time to take control and turn that
around. Tax payers deserve better representation!
As Lt. Governor you can be assured that I will remain
accessible and respectful and work hard every day to
bring good ideas, transparency, accountability, and
common sense to state government. The time is now
to take action and take advantage of the opportunities
that are in front of us. You deserve so much more from
government, through me you will take charge. Let's rise
together! you can also fi nd me at @billpenor and https://
www.facebook.com/BillPenor2016/
For More Information:
(425) 931-7195
billpenor2016@yahoo.com
www.billpenor.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
6 2 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Lieutenant Governor
Paul Addis
(Prefers Libertarian Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: VP, Belltown
Community Council (2014); PCO,
1st Legislative District (2012)
Other Professional Experience: Sr.
Business Analyst (Finance), Alaska
Airlines; Accounting Specialist, Delta Airlines; CEO, Life
Spring Ministry International; Cryptologic Linguist, US
Army Intelligence
Education: BBA, Management (Georgia State University)
Community Service: Meals on Wheels (Regional Coordinator); YearUp! (Mentor); City Fruit (Volunteer); Alaska
Air Green Team (Member); Bread of Life Mission (Volunteer)
Statement: Every sports fan knows that a referee can’t
call a fair game if they are working for one of the teams.
As a member of neither the Republican nor Democratic
Parties, I am uniquely qualifi ed to be the most practical
and impartial ‘referee’ in the Lieutenant Governor’s role
as Senate President. As someone that doesn’t accept donations from big money special interests, I am likewise
best suited to carry out the duties of Rules Committee
Chair. Only a ‘gatekeeper’ that isn’t beholden to those
special interests can ensure the voice of the people is
heard in the Senate.
As your Lieutenant Governor, my primary function will
be to ensure that legislation benefi cial to the people
sees the light of day, that legislation is fairly debated
and that legislation favored by corporate interests
doesn’t get preferential treatment.
My criteria for appointing committee members will be
how well they have supported legislation that benefi ts
the people over corporate interests. I believe that civil
and economic liberty provide maximum prosperity and
happiness in a society.
We need to make the legislative process more accessible to the citizens. I’m asking for your support and your
vote. Let’s make a positive change together.
For More Information:
(253) 709-8173
pauladdislp@gmail.com
www.Addis4LG.com
Daniel B. Davies
(States No Party Preference)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: No information
submitted
Other Professional Experience:
Gun Shop Owner
Education: No information submitted
Community Service: No information submitted
Statement: I have been a gun shop owner in Tacoma,
WA for over 10 years. I know fi rst hand how regulations
hurt small business. We need to free business from
unnecessary, unproductive burdens and get back to the
basics. A good economy is good for everyone, so let's
tax at a lower rate, developing more income with less
resistance.
I support your Second Amendment rights. I believe any
non felon U.S. Citizen should be able to purchase and
bear fi rearms with minimal government interference.
I support a fi ve year minimum sentence for “theft of a
fi rearm” or a “convicted felon in possession of a fi rearm”. This would stop a lot of crime.
I oppose a state income tax, I oppose a state carbon tax.
I don't like light rail. Buses are a better way to go. Buses
are more versatile than rail, providing fl exible routing
and re-routing.
I don't like career politicians. Government service should
not be a lifetime job. I want to be your Lt. Governor to
make a difference, and show what a working man can
do with common sense.
www.facebook.com/DanielDaviesForWashingtonState
LtGovernor2016
For More Information:
Daniel.B.Davies.2016@gmail.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
6 3 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Lieutenant Governor
Karen Wallace
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: No information
submitted
Other Professional Experience: Realtor; Entrepreneur of successful and
profi table, Seattle small business.
Education: Attended Central Washington University and
Bellevue College.
Community Service: Windermere Foundation; John L
Scott Foundation; Ronald McDonald House; WSHFC
Homebuyer Home Advantage Program; Dedicated to
clean water and rubbish-free forests.
Statement: As a Realtor and small business owner, I
know how important it is that state government creates
opportunity and prosperity for all. As a long time community volunteer, I have a proven track record of working with people of all backgrounds to create positive
change here in Washington.
In my profession, I have observed more and more
people fi nding it diffi cult to access the American Dream
whether it is saving for college, achieving homeownership, or starting a small business. I am running for
Lieutenant Governor to help my fellow Washingtonians
achieve these goals.
I want to bring a modern approach in new thinking to
our state government that will lead to more investment
in high quality public education, reduce taxes on small
businesses, and cut unnecessary regulations that impact
job growth. I want homeownership to be available for
everyone. As a woman who has overcome professional
obstacles, I am committed to eliminating the wage gap
between men and women in our state. I am 100% prochoice.
As Lieutenant Governor, I will work with legislators on
both parties to build bipartisan support around positioning Washington State to become a leading example of
business prosperity and high quality education nationally.
For More Information:
(206) 910-8807
karenwallace@windermere.com
Cyrus Habib
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Senator,
48th Legislative District; Member of
the Senate Democratic Leadership
Team; Democratic Whip; former
State Representative, 48th Legislative District; former Vice Chairman
of Economic Development Committee.
Other Professional Experience: Attorney at Perkins Coie
representing entrepreneurs and small businesses; professor at Seattle University Law School.
Education: Public school graduate, additional coursework at the Washington State School for the Blind; Bachelor’s from Columbia; Master’s from Oxford (Rhodes
Scholar); law degree from Yale.
Community Service: Advisory Board, University of
Washington Eye Institute; Board of Directors, 5th Avenue
Theatre; Board of Directors, Bellevue College Foundation; former King County Civil Rights Commissioner;
Parishioner, St. James Cathedral.
Statement: I lost my eyesight to childhood cancer, but
thanks to dedicated public school teachers, I went on
to become a lawyer and legislator, committed to giving
every child the opportunity to realize their potential.
In the State Senate, I’ve worked to fund schools and reduce college tuition. I've fought to expand access to contraception, protect reproductive rights, and expand paid
sick leave. I reached across the aisle to pass landmark
transportation investments. I’ll bring my proven record
and an entrepreneurial approach to make the offi ce of
Lieutenant Governor more relevant, championing quality public education, environmental protection, and new
jobs.
The Lieutenant Governor presides over the State Senate;
as the only attorney in this race and a law professor who
teaches legislative procedure, I’ll ensure we save time
and money by opposing budgets that violate the Constitution by shortchanging public schools. When the
Legislature fails our kids, we all lose. Let’s make government work for all of us.
Endorsements: Attorney General Bob Ferguson, King
County Democrats, Washington Education Association,
Washington Conservation Voters, American Federation
of Teachers, State Labor Council, former Congressman
Norm Dicks, nearly all Seattle and Tacoma Councilmembers, dozens of mayors and legislators from Spokane to
Vancouver; many more.
For More Information:
(425) 679-9103
cyrus@cyrushabib.com
www.cyrushabib.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
6 4 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Lieutenant Governor
Javier H. Figueroa
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Mayor and
council member, City of University
Place, WA.
Other Professional Experience:
President, Rainier Communication
Commission; Lands Program Manager, Washington
State Parks and Recreation Commission; Energy Specialist, Washington State Energy Offi ce, Arbitrator-Better
Business Bureau, Executive Vice President, Rockmann
Development Group LLC; U.S. Army (12 years).
Education: Three years of undergraduate work in Business Administration; Advance Municipal Leadership
Certifi cate, Association of Washington Cities; Specialized
training in organizational structure and project implementation, U.S. Army.
Community Service: Member, State Council on Aging;
Board of Directors, Tahoma Audubon Society; 2015 U.S.
Open Task Force; Board Member, The Grand Cinema;
Speaker, The White House Conference on Global Climate Change.
Statement: Javier Figueroa will use his 35 years of
business experience to support economic development
throughout Washington by implementing best practices
in business incubation because for every public dollar
spent on incubators, the community's return-on-investment is nearly $30. This is especially important for veterans, like Figueroa, as well as new college graduates and
members of traditionally disenfranchised communities
who simply want an opportunity to pursue the American
dream.
Figueroa believes economic growth must be balanced
with its environmental impact. He will use his expertise
in climate change and energy sustainability to preserve
the natural resources that are so important to the people
of Washington.
As a naturalized citizen, Figueroa will advocate for quality education for all children because he knows personally of its transformative powers. He will continue to
push for stronger elder abuse protections as he has
done while serving on Governor Inslee's State Council
on Aging.
As a business arbitrator for 21 years, Figueroa brings an
important skill set to the Lt. Governor's offi ce. He will
bridge different political viewpoints to keep everyone
moving forward. He believes this is what is needed from
government today-less gridlock and more progress to
address the needs of all Washingtonians.
For More Information:
(253) 318-1518
Javier@ElectFigueroa.com
www.electfi gueroa.com
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
6 5 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Secretary of State
Tina Podlodowski
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Seattle City
Councilmember
Other Professional Experience:
Director and Senior Manager at
Microsoft; Senior Vice President at
Porter Novelli; Puget Sound Business Journal “Woman
of Excellence”
Education: University of Hartford, Bachelor of Science,
Computer Engineering
Community Service: Big Brothers and Big Sisters of
Puget Sound; Co-founder of Washington Alliance for
Gun Responsibility; Washington Citizens for Fairness;
CITIES Technology and Leadership Project, Urban
League of Metropolitan Seattle “Spirit Award”; Human
Rights Campaign
Statement: Tina Podlodowski offers a proven 30-year
track record of elected and community leadership, and
the technology and management experience to get voters participating in our democracy again. She’s currently
working with auditors and leaders in all 39 counties on
improvements like postage-paid ballots, more ballot
drop boxes, and automatic voter registration.
A successful high-tech businesswoman, Tina is qualifi ed
to champion neglected reforms to support Washington
businesses and safeguard our tax dollars. She will invest
responsibly in a voting system that works for everyone,
not a particular political party.
Washington used to be a leader in elections. But under
the current Secretary of State voter participation has
declined to a record low of 38%, with over one million
eligible citizens still unregistered. Like many partisan
Republicans, the incumbent has routinely opposed the
Washington Voting Rights Act and other voting innovations like Election Day registration and pre-registration
for 16 and 17 year olds. We must do better.
Tina is the only candidate endorsed by the non-partisan
Women’s Political Caucus of Washington – and she is
supported by county auditors, community organizations,
and voters of all parties who agree with Tina: “Every
voice matters. Every vote counts.”
For More Information:
(206) 419-1364
Tina@votersfortina.com
www.votersfortina.com
Kim Wyman
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Washington
Secretary of State, 2013 – present;
Thurston County Auditor, 2001 –
2013.
Other Professional Experience:
Served ten years as Thurston County Elections Manager,
Assistant Records Manager; 18 months as a U.S. Army
Civilian Training Specialist.
Education: Bachelor of Arts, California State University,
Long Beach, 1985; Master of Public Administration, Troy
State University, 1990; Certifi ed Elections Registration
Administrator (CERA), Auburn University/Election Center, 2004 – present; Washington State Certifi ed Election
Administrator, 1995 – present.
Community Service: Jennifer Dunn Leadership Institute
Board Chair, Honorary Co-Chair NTPS Levy Committee,
Washington Historical Society Board of Directors; YMCA
Youth and Government Advisory Board; TVW Board of
Directors; Lacey Rotary Club.
Statement: Thank you for the honor of serving as your
Secretary of State. I have continued the offi ce's nonpartisan legacy by expanding registration and voting access,
maintaining the integrity of our elections, preserving our
state's rich heritage, and making it easier for businesses
and charities to register with state government. Washington is a national leader, with more registered voters
than at any time in state history.
With another four years I will continue working hard
with county auditors and election advocates to modernize and secure our voter registration and election
systems, increase voter participation, and continue to
increase accessibility to the State Library and Archives.
I will continue to advocate for underserved people -
military service members and those with special needs,
promote civics education, and provide transparent
government. Most importantly, it will continue to be my
paramount duty to maintain the nonpartisan integrity
and citizen-oriented philosophy of the offi ce.
I am proud to be endorsed by all former Secretaries of
State and over 50 county auditors and elections directors - including Democrats, Republicans and Independents. They know the job and share my passion for
accurate elections and preserving our state's legacy.
I ask for your vote to continue this important work.
For More Information:
(360) 746-6668
Kim@kimwyman.com
www.kimwyman.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
6 6 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Secretary of State
Tim Turner
(Prefers Libertarian Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience:
Software Engineer, Navy Nuclear
Chemist, U.S. Navy Submariner,
Author, High School Teacher
Education: Bachelor of Science in Game and Simulation
Programming, Magna Cum Laude, DeVry University,
2009. Navy Nuclear Propulsion Training Command, certifi ed Engineering Laboratory Technician
Community Service: I try to be a decent person everywhere I go. I make the world a better place one step at
a time, one piece of litter a walk, one extra smile a day.
To me, charity isn’t about a club membership or a pat on
the back.
Statement: Our political system is deeply broken, and is
in need of reform to bring more fairness, honesty, and
community back. Political parties have too much power.
Too many politicians forget that public offi ce is a service, not a career.
I come from a family of service in local, state, and federal government. To me, service isn’t about what you
get out of the system, but a solemn sacrifi ce. As a Navy
veteran, I put my life on the line for our voting rights. In
2013, I stepped into a classroom fi lled with 21 struggling
programing students. Together we caught up and got
so far ahead that I had to create more curriculum. I’m
proud to have upheld my family’s tradition of service.
I’m running third party to respectfully remind the Big
Two Parties that they need to put the people before
party politics. I refuse corporate donations and special
interest money. I represent political party reform, electoral college reform, and election reform.
As Secretary of State, I will be honored to continue my
family’s tradition of service by ensuring the justice and
integrity of your vote, without party politics. Stand with
me, and we'll fi x our political system together.
For More Information:
(360) 536-5789
info@ElectTimTurner.com
http://www.electtimturner.com/
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
6 7 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
State Treasurer
John Paul Comerford
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Elected PCO;
Elected Town Commissioner
Other Professional Experience:
Registered Pension Fiduciary; Vice
Chair, Investment Advisory Board,
City of Seattle Retirement System; Member, Washington
Economic Development Finance Authority; Appointed
by President Carter as President of the National Consumer Cooperative Bank; Associate Director, The White
House Conference on Economic Development; Founded
two successful community banks; Democratic Congressional nominee, 1994; Original Member, Obama for
America Retirement Security Committee.
Education: Graduate Degrees from the Universities of
Cambridge, London and Harvard and the American College of Financial Services. BA, Massachusetts.
Community Service: Treasurer, World Affairs Council;
Chair, Queen Anne Food Program; Member, National
Community Investment Advisory Board.
Statement: John Comerford is an experienced fi nancial
leader. As Treasurer, John will contribute to the solution for fully funding public education while transitioning from our regressive sales tax and ever-increasing
property taxes.
John will bring his passion for fi nancial education
to Washington and make us the model for successful personal fi nancial decision-making, particularly in
retirement savings and consumerism. John will bring
the power of this Offi ce to bear on the critical fi nancial,
social and environmental issues we face, including the
timely and orderly divestment of fossil fuel investments.
The Treasurer serves on over 20 boards that directly
impact these issues. Using the experience he gained
in starting a Federal consumer bank under President
Carter, John will start a much-needed State Bank in
Washington.
John has earned the Accredited Investment Fiduciary,
Registered Fiduciary and Chartered Financial Consultant
designations and will make sure that we are managing
our investments and debt in a professional and environmentally responsible manner. No other candidate has
the experience, education and professional credentials
that John brings to this Position.
Honorable Discharge: U.S. Air Force. Married: one
daughter.Endorsed by: King County Democratic Central Committee, State Legislators, business leaders and
Washington voters like you.
For More Information:
(206) 625-3200
jpc@jpclife.com
www.johnpaul2016.com
Marko Liias
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Senator,
2014-present; State Representative,
2008-2014; Mukilteo City Council,
2006-2008
Other Professional Experience:
Marko managed a small, family-owned construction
company, and has worked on budget and fi nance issues
in local government.
Education: Marko was the fi rst in his family to go to
college, earning a bachelor's degree at Georgetown
University. He was a graduate student at the University
of Washington and completed the Senior Executives in
State and Local Government program at Harvard University.
Community Service: Marko has volunteered for numerous non-profi t organizations, he's currently a board
member of the Transportation Choices Coalition and the
Seattle Repertory Theater.
Statement: Our next Treasurer must ensure that tax dollars are wisely managed, but we need someone who will
also stand up for struggling middle class families. Senator Marko Liias is the trusted leader who will ensure that
our families have someone looking out for our bottom
line--and the state's bottom line.
Marko was an architect of the bi-partisan transportation
package which is generating billions in new investments
all over Washington--investments that must be carefully
managed by our next Treasurer. Still repaying student
loans, Marko understands the crisis of student debt
that's threatening families everywhere. He's committed
to crafting a student loan refi nancing program to help
graduates save thousands on interest.
Marko knows the struggles facing families across Washington. During the recession, Marko’s family lost their
small business and his parents lost the nest egg they
were counting on for retirement. We can trust him to
fi ght for retirement security for our families while standing up to Wall Street to get taxpayers the best deal for
our state's investments.
Marko is endorsed by scores of community leaders,
labor groups and small business owners from all over
Washington. He will be a Treasurer for the people--not
the powerful.
For More Information:
(425) 610-8683
marko@markoliias.com
www.markoliias.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
6 8 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
State Treasurer
Duane Davidson
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Benton County
Treasurer, 2003-Present.
Other Professional Experience:
Certifi ed Public Accountant (CPA);
former Chief Finance Offi cer for
Benton County Auditor’s Offi ce; former Assistant State
Auditor; Loan Offi cer for a Consumer Finance Company.
Education: Tolt High School, Carnation, WA; Associate
Degree from Bellevue Community College, Bellevue,
WA; Bachelor Degree in Accounting from Central Washington University.
Community Service: Current President, Washington
State Association of County Treasurers; Past President,
Atomic City Kiwanis; Past President, Tri-City Industry
Kiwanis; Current Treasurer for Tri-City Kiwanis Foundation; Past Church Treasurer and member of Gideon’s
International; Precinct Committee Offi cer and Past Treasurer for the Benton County Republican Party.
Statement: Duane Davidson is the Benton County Treasurer. He is endorsed by nearly every county treasurer
in the state, including both Democrats and Republicans.
The most trusted leaders in our state have endorsed
Duane: former Governor Dan Evans, Secretary of State
Kim Wyman and former Secretary of State Sam Reed
among others.
The incumbent state Treasurer has used his offi ce to
push for a state income tax. Duane Davidson believes
the State Treasurer should be above partisan politics,
he’ll never use this offi ce to promote an income tax or
other agenda. He will defend the interests of taxpayers
and always keep the state government accountable for
how it invests our tax dollars.
No one is better qualifi ed to serve as State Treasurer.
Duane leads the county treasurers’ association, his offi ce has innovated nationally recognized efforts to save
taxpayer money and improve government openness
and accountability. He’s established an investment pool
that manages hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars.
There’s a big difference between safeguarding taxpayer
money and managing personal investments, Duane
knows the difference.
Duane lives in the Tri-Cities. He’s active in the Gideons,
Kiwanis, and his local church. He has three children,
Bailey, Luke, and Kinzey.
For More Information:
(509) 734-7106
Duane@electDuaneDavidson.org
www.DuaneDavidson.org
Michael Waite
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: You deserve a
fi nance professional - not a professional politician - as your State
Treasurer. While this is my fi rst run
for offi ce, I’m the only candidate
with 15+ years of private sector
fi nance, investment and accounting experience
Other Professional Experience: Senior VP of Operations, Bentall Kennedy, managing $11.1 billion of assets.
Head of Accounting, Cascade Investment (Bill & Melinda
Gates’s investment fi rm), managed $70 billion of assets.
Education: MBA, Emory University. BBA, Accounting
and Management, Columbus State University.
Community Service: United Way of King County: Board
Member (2012-2015); Finance and Audit Committees
(2008-2015); Early Learning Impact Council (2012-present).
Statement: You deserve honest and understandable
management of our State’s fi nances. For too long, the
professional politicians elected Treasurer have helped
put us $20 billion in debt. Now Washington has the 6th
highest state debt per person in the nation.
This defi cit spending is unacceptable. I will lead us in a
different direction.
I’m the only candidate with the high-level private industry experience to bring much needed change to the
Treasurer’s offi ce. My professional fi nance background,
and commitment to integrity and open government,
have earned me endorsements from former Attorney
General Rob McKenna and Independents, Democrats,
and Republicans across our state (see HireMichaelWaite.
com).
As Treasurer, I will fi ght for you against the dangers of
increasing our debt, or hurting our economy with a state
income tax. I will honestly present fi nancial information
to taxpayers and, most importantly, prioritize effi ciency,
accountability and decreasing state debt. That way we
can increase the money available for schools, public
safety, our social safety net, and community infrastructure, instead of spending $2 billion every year on debt
payments to Wall Street. I’ve thrived as a fi nance professional by delivering for clients - now, let me deliver for
you. Please vote Michael Waite for Treasurer.
For More Information:
(425) 233-8176
info@HireMichaelWaite.com
www.HireMichaelWaite.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
6 9 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
State Treasurer
Alec Fisken
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Port of Seattle
Commissioner 2004-2008
Other Professional Experience:
Strategic Policy Advisor: Transportation and utility fi nance, City of
Seattle. Vice President, Prudential Bache Capital Funding: Financial consulting and debt issuance for Northwest municipalities. Vice President, Rainier National
Bank: Debt structure and fi nancial plan development for
Washington’s cities, ports, utilities. Consultant: Managed Seattle City Council’s investigation of the response
to WTO meeting protests. Publisher: Marine Digest and
Seattle Sun. Consultant: Africa and European Common
Market.
Education: Harvard University, Masters in Public Administration; Yale University, BA History
Community Service: Boards: Town Hall, Sanctuary Art
Center, Elevated Transportation Company, Evergreen
Community Development, Country Doctor, Environmental Works, Metrocenter YMCA
Statement: When endorsing Alec’s campaign, Jim McIntire, the retiring State Treasurer, said “I believe only
Alec has the experience, insight, and expertise to continue this offi ce’s essential work. . . . As our population
and economy continue to grow, we need Alec’s experience working for the long-term fi scal health of our state,
counties and cities.”
Alec has decades of experience: He has worked in bond
markets to help local governments issue debt, dealt
with rating agencies, and planned fi nancial strategies
in responsible political positions. Alec is the only candidate for Treasurer with both public- and private-sector
fi nance experience, and is best qualifi ed to manage the
Treasurer’s Offi ce while also facilitating the legislature’s
overdue reform of Washington’s antiquated tax system.
Experience matters. The Treasurer’s Offi ce sells billions
of dollars in debt every year and manages billions in
investments. All of it belongs to you, Washington State
taxpayers. The Treasurer works in a chaotic world, with
volatile fi nancial markets, and big banks that often do
not have our best interests at heart. Alec has the background and experience to know how things work and a
life-long track record of making them work for you. Vote
for your Treasurer: Alec Fisken.
For More Information:
(206) 310-4137
alecfi sken@gmail.com
info@fi skenfortreasurer.com
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
Sign the voter declaration on the back
of your return envelope before sending it back. Take your time and sign
with your everyday signature.
Before any ballot can be counted,
state law requires that we make sure
the signature on the ballot envelope
matches the signature on fi le in your
voter registration record.
If you forget to sign, or if the signature doesn’t match, elections staff will
contact you so that your ballot can be
counted.
David Clarke
(253) 555-1960
Your signature
matters
7/20/16
7 0 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
State Auditor
Pat (Patrice) McCarthy
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Pierce County
Executive, currently serving her
second term. Pat leads a county
government with 3,000 employees.
Previously elected as Pierce County
Auditor (2005 County Auditor of
the Year) and twelve years as a Tacoma School Board
Member.
Other Professional Experience: Sound Transit, Recent
Chair; 2015 U.S. Open Championship, Chair; Board
Member: Alliance for a Healthy South Sound, TacomaPierce County Economic Development Board, South
Sound Military & Communities Partnership.
Education: B.A., University of Washington, Tacoma
Community Service: Sexual Assault Center of Pierce
County, Emeritus; United Way of Pierce County; Received awards for land conservation, open government,
and access to justice.
Statement: I am the only candidate for State Auditor
with proven executive leadership experience. I have
always served the public with honesty and integrity during my 25 years of local government service. It’s why I
was named the 2005 County Auditor of the Year by the
Secretary of State, and it’s why I’ve been endorsed by
many County Auditors on both sides of the Cascades!
Trusted: I have an unmatched understanding of public
records and public money. It’s why I’ve been endorsed
by Chris Gregoire and Norm Dicks; County Executives
Dow Constantine, Ron Sims, and Bob Drewel; National
Women’s Political Caucus; AFSCME/WSCCCE Council 2;
and many other leaders listed on my website.
Tested: Restoring public confi dence in the State Auditor’s offi ce won’t be an easy job. I served as County
Auditor during the 2004 gubernatorial recount, and I led
the statewide effort to restore public confi dence in our
elections system. I led Pierce County through the Great
Recession and stood up against elected offi cials who
abused the public’s trust.
Transparent: My offi ce received the Key Award from the
Washington Coalition for Open Government for refreshing recordkeeping for the digital age. Government must
be accountable to the public it serves.
For More Information:
(253) 693-8147
pat@patmccarthy.org
www.patmccarthy.org
David Golden
(States No Party Preference)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: This will be my
fi rst election.
Other Professional No information
submitted
Education: BS Civil and Environmental Engineering
Washington State University, 1997. MS Structural Engineering University of Washington, 2008.
Community Service: No information submitted
Statement: I formerly worked for the Washington State
Department of Transportation as a structural bridge
inspector. I was a fi rst responder for bridge catastrophic
damage and worked to ensure bridge safety throughout
the entire state. Hence, I have extensive experience in
protecting public safety and welfare.
I am not a politician but believe that the skills I have are
easily transferable. You can be sure that I will work only
for you, the people.
 Thank you for your vote.
For More Information:
goldend321@gmail.com
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
continued
7 1 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Mark Wilson
(Prefers Independent Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: I have not previously run for public offi ce.
Other Professional Experience:
Auditor/Forensic Accountant/Fraud
Examiner, Wilson Accounting &
Consulting, General Accounting Manager, Starbucks
Coffee Co., Controller, North American Profi les, Ltd.,
Controller, Colonnade Technologies, Inc., Cash Manager, Todd Shipyards Corp., Sr. Internal Auditor, Western
Union Intl., Auditor, Haralson & Co. CPAs.
Education: Graduate, Bellevue Christian High School,
Bachelor of Business Administration, University of Puget
Sound, Bachelor of Accounting Science, University of
Puget Sound, MBA Financial Management, City University of Seattle, Certifi cate in Private Investigation, University of Washington.
Community Service: Washington Citizens Action, AARP
Fraud, Numerous pro-bono church audits and examinations.
Statement: I am not a career politician. In fact this is
the fi rst time I have ever run for offi ce. What I am is an
auditing, accounting, and fraud examination professional who has over thirty years of experience behind
him. In my practice I work as a forensic accountant,
fraud examiner and fi nancial investigator. I have worked
closely with law enforcement, both local and Federal,
industry, labor unions, government, and individuals. As
a very experienced audit manager I strongly believe that
my skills and experience are ideally suited to the needs
and requirements of the Washington State Auditors’ Offi ce. As has been said on many occasions, “There is no
substitute for experience.” I have that experience.
Recent events have taken their toll on the State Auditors’
Offi ce. One of my primary goals as State Auditor will
be to restore the integrity and professionalism that had
made it one of the most respected state auditing agencies in the United States. In so doing the State Auditors’
Offi ce will again provide the citizens of Washington with
the vigilant oversight that will ensure their tax dollars
are not wasted but used in the most effi cient and economically responsible manner possible.
For More Information:
(425) 444-1770
mark@wilson-4-auditor.com
www.wilson-4-auditor.com
Mark Miloscia
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Senator,
2015-Present; State Representative, 1999-2013; Chair, House Audit
Review Committee; Chair, Senate
Accountability Committee; Commissioner, Lakehaven Utility District,
 1996-1999
Other Professional Experience: Air Force B-52 Pilot,
Contract Manager for Boeing’s B-1 program, Quality Examiner for the Baldrige National Performance Program;
Tacoma Goodwill Director managing three businesses
serving individuals with disabilities; Substitute Teacher,
Auburn School District
Education: BS, Engineering, USAF Academy; MBA,
University of ND; MS, Clinical Psychology, Chapman
University
Community Service: Federal Way Boys and Girls Club
Board; Lake Dolloff PTA VP; FW Community Caregiving
Network Board President serving meals to the needy
and housing homeless women with children.
Statement: Our state needs a passionate, skilled State
Auditor who will hold all government agencies accountable to Washingtonians. As the only candidate who’s
audited, reviewed, and improved businesses, hospitals,
government agencies, nonprofi ts, and colleges, I’m able
to lead the embattled State Auditor’s Offi ce and get
results on day one.
We’ve seen the terrible headlines of mismanaged and
failing government agencies--ineffective homelessness
programs that increase homelessness and crime, prisoners escaping mental hospitals, state employees injured,
prison inmates released early, and a Transportation
Department creating gridlock on our roads. We can and
must do better!
I’ve spent my life in both the public and private sector
championing effi cient, effective and ethical government;
justice for the most vulnerable; and increasing public
trust. Every dollar government wastes means fewer resources in the classroom or for those in need, and more
pressure to raise taxes. As State Auditor, I will use performance audits to ensure all our governments become
good stewards of your tax dollars, achieve real results,
and earn your trust!
We deserve the most effi cient, effective, and ethical government. We can’t afford to elect someone to this critical
offi ce who has zero experience. Elect an accomplished
auditor—elect Mark Miloscia for State Auditor!
For More Information:
(253) 839-7087
miloscia@comcast.net
www.MarkMiloscia.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
State Auditor continued
7 2 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
State Auditor
Jeff Sprung
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Lawyer for
whistleblowers, devoted husband
and father, son of Auschwitz survivor, community leader. Jeff has
never sought political offi ce.
Other Professional Experience: Jeff has managed fi nancial investigations of the misuse of our tax dollars for 30
years. At a top-ten nationwide law fi rm, he represents
whistleblowers reporting corporations for defrauding
the government. Previously an Assistant US Attorney,
he supervised fi nancial investigations of companies
stealing from low-income housing programs.
Education: JD, University of Chicago; BA, University of
Michigan
Community Service: Recent board president of Planned
Parenthood Votes Northwest, board member of an environmental whistleblower organization, leader in Washington State Association for Justice.
Statement: Jeff Sprung is the only candidate with
hands-on fi nancial audit and investigations experience, having returned over $750 million to citizens from
fi nancial fraud by drug companies and big banks. Jeff is
not a career politician. He has spent his career fi ghting
alongside whistleblowers to demand openness and accountability from government – and corporations doing
business with government.
In the recent legislative session, Jeff was the only candidate demanding Olympia politicians stop diverting
citizen-mandated Auditor funding. Jeff will restore the
trust and morale of this offi ce and bring an experienced,
outsider’s perspective to auditing government. A reproductive freedom champion, Jeff will safeguard women's
health funding from partisan audits. He will be the independent voice to give us the government we want.
“As an experienced fi nancial watchdog, I’ll work every
day to make government more transparent, assuring our
hard-earned tax dollars are spent as we intend. I’ll demand accountability from government and corporations
that receive government dollars or tax breaks.”
Jeff is endorsed by Attorney General Bob Ferguson;
Washington State Labor Council; 40 elected offi cials;
Planned Parenthood Votes Northwest Board members;
Bellevue, Pierce, and other Firefi ghters; Spokane, Snohomish, King County Democrats; retired 20-year Auditor
Brian Sonntag.
For More Information:
(253) 271-8072
info@jeffsprung.com
www.jeffsprung.com
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
7 3 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Attorney General
Bob Ferguson
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Washington’s
18th Attorney General.
Other Professional Experience: Law
clerk in Spokane for Chief Judge
Nielsen of the Federal District Court
of Eastern Washington, law clerk for Judge Bright of the
8th Circuit Court of Appeals, and attorney at Preston,
Gates & Ellis (now K&L Gates,) one of Washington’s
leading law fi rms.
Education: Blanchet High School, B.A. University of
Washington, J.D. New York University School of Law.
Community Service: Bob and his family are active in
St. Catherine’s Church; Bob joined the Jesuit Volunteer
Corps after college and directed an emergency services
offi ce.
Statement: A fourth-generation Washingtonian, husband, and father of two, Bob Ferguson is working hard
to protect our seniors, homeowners, veterans, and
small businesses from powerful special interests that
don’t play by the rules. Standing up for us, Bob took on
foreign corporations and Wall Street special interests,
returning more than fi fty million dollars to hardworking
Washingtonians – including millions for homeowners
facing foreclosure.
Endorsed by the Washington State Patrol Troopers
Association and prosecutors across the state, Bob is
protecting our kids and communities from violent sex
predators. He’s built specialized units prosecuting environmental crimes, assisting veterans, and upholding the
civil rights of all Washingtonians.
An independent leader, Bob is protecting taxpayers by
combating Medicaid fraud, and reforming Olympia by
introducing laws to make government more open and
accountable. Committed to transparency and protecting our political system, Bob is shining a light on dark
money in politics, successfully prosecuting the largest
campaign fi nance violation in state history.
Son of a public school teacher and 40-year Boeing
employee, Bob brings middle class values and independence to the offi ce of Attorney General. Bob will
continue to use the law as a powerful tool for justice and
fairness for all Washingtonians.
For More Information:
(206) 486-2621
info@electbobferguson.com
www.electbobferguson.com
Joshua B. Trumbull
(Prefers Libertarian Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Absolutely no
political experience.
Other Professional Experience: I
grew up working at my dad’s auto
body shop and my grandma’s
autoparts store in Snohomish. During college, I worked
in house painting, banking, and real estate. Importantly,
I have had the privilege of helping people in my law
practice.
Education: Snohomish High School, Snohomish, WA.
2000; University of Washington, B.A Business Administration & Management, 2004; Seattle University, Albers
School of Business and Economics, M.B.A, 2005; Gonzaga University School of Law, 2008.
Community Service: Lake Stevens Youth Soccer. I provide a signifi cant amount of reduced fee legal work to
community members.
Statement: In 1800, John Adams wrote, “There is nothing which I dread so much as a division of the republic
into two great parties, each arranged under its leader,
and concerting measures in opposition to each other.
This, in my humble apprehension, is to be dreaded as
the greatest political evil under our constitution.” History shows other founders including Alexander Hamilton, George Washington, and Thomas Jefferson shared
Adam's concern. Perilously, this wisdom has yet to be
integrated into our society.
I chose to run for Attorney General because the Offi ce
has become politicized to the detriment of the people.
Like our founders, I believe collaborative problem solving requires more than two parties. We suffer when we
divide ourselves into opposing parties and attempt to
rule others by majority.
If elected, I will continue working to protect Washington
Citizens from those that would deprive us of life, liberty,
or property.
Thank you for strengthening our society by taking your
time and energy to discuss important issues with those
around you before you cast your vote. The process of
discussion is what bonds us together. The time to vote
from your heart, instead of according to party, is now.
For More Information:
(425) 309-7700
josh@joshuatrumbull.com
www.joshuatrumbull.com
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
74 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Commissioner of Public Lands
Hilary Franz
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Bainbridge Island City Council; served on Puget
Sound Transportation Futures
Taskforce; Puget Sound Regional
Council Growth Management and
Economic Development Boards;
Puget Sound Salmon Recovery Council; Kitsap Regional
Coordinating Council; appointed to Governor Gregoire’s
Climate Action Team.
Other Professional Experience: Executive Director,
Futurewise 2011-present, crafting solutions to complex
land use and natural resource issues statewide; Attorney, representing communities, local government, and
non-profi ts on critical cases involving agriculture, forest,
fi sh and wildlife, and waterways.
Education: JD, Northeastern University; BA, Smith College
Community Service: Former board member of Washington Environmental Council and Conservation Northwest.
Active in the education of three teenage sons!
Statement: How we manage and protect Washington’s
public lands and waterways shape how we adapt to
climate change, protect our water and food sources, and
safeguard our timber, shellfi sh, and agricultural economies. Our next Commissioner must be a conservation
steward, partner for rural economies, and advocate for
clean energy jobs.
I have a lifelong connection to Washington’s people and
places. My grandparents came to the Nisqually Valley in
the Great Depression to start a cattle farm, which remains in our family today. For two decades I’ve worked
with businesses and communities large and small to
protect landscapes and local jobs, crafting lasting solutions.
With your vote, I’ll work to restore healthy forests— implementing wildfi re prevention plans and ending dangerous steep slope logging. I’ll promote clean energy
jobs— implementing a renewable energy plan on public
lands that creates job growth, curbs carbon pollution,
and reduces impacts on vulnerable communities. I’ll
protect our working farmlands and forests from development pressures— enhancing opportunities for farmers, forestry, and recreation.
Proudly endorsed by Washington Conservation Voters;
King County Democrats; King County Executive Dow
Constantine; former Executive Ron Sims; Earth Day
founder Denis Hayes; state and local business, community, and government leaders statewide!
For More Information:
(206) 734-9729
hilary@hilaryfranz.com
www.hilaryfranz.com
Mary Verner
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: As Mayor of
Spokane, established river cleanup and renewable energy business
collaborative. Elected City Council
and Precinct Committee Offi cer.
Other Professional Experience: Enforcement offi cer
for Virgin Islands Natural Resources. Leader of Native
American Natural Resources organizations restoring
salmon, managing forests for habitats and jobs. Executive of environmental restoration and renewable energy
businesses.
Education: Bachelor's Davidson College, Master's Yale
Forestry & Environmental Studies, Juris Doctor Gonzaga
University
Community Service: Mary has devoted her life to public
service and volunteering on boards and committees,
community and church activities, emergency response
and rescue, and teen outdoor learning.
Statement: I ask for your vote to be Commissioner of
Public Lands because I have the passion, background
and experience to protect Washington’s forests, farms,
ranches, aquatic lands and open spaces. As a hands-on
natural resources leader, I’ve facilitated salmon restoration, enforced responsible clean-up by polluters, and
grown forestry jobs in resource-dependent regions. As
an emergency response offi cial, I am actively working
with local communities to improve the way we prevent
and respond more effectively to wildfi res.
The Commissioner is responsible for millions of dollars
of timber and lease income, public funds, and landowner fees. A hardworking taxpayer myself, I understand
how important it is to be very careful with the public’s
trust.
Our state faces major economic and environmental challenges, with sweeping implications of climate change.
As a collaborative leader, I value input from employees
and stakeholders to inform smart decisions based on
science and facts.
My previous experience leading large complex organizations demonstrated that I break down barriers to achieve
good outcomes. I’ve reduced costs while maintaining
jobs, and conserved resources while conserving revenue. I am a pragmatic and proven leader who will wisely
manage public lands for all of us.
For More Information:
(253) 229-7727
campaign@maryverner.com
www.maryverner.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
7 5 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Commissioner of Public Lands
Steven M. Nielson
(Prefers Libertarian Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Chairman,
Libertarian Party of Washington
(2015); Secretary, Libertarian Party
of Washington (2014); Precinct
Committee Offi cer (2010); Secretary,
Douglas County Republicans (2006)
Other Professional Experience: Quality Engineer / Manager - advanced aerospace composites for military satellites & air/spacefl ight; process improvement specialist;
auditor; children’s author; Christmas tree farmer
Education: Bachelor of Science, University of Washington Dept. of Aeronautics and Astronautics Engineering;
Leadership Program of the Rockies; Enumclaw High
School Alumni
Community Service: Parks Commission Chairman &
Civil Service Chairman, City of Orting; Audubon Society
volunteer; education outreach via AVID program; worksite coordinator for American Heart Association
Statement: The issues facing this offi ce cross party
lines. Decades of poor forest management have threatened the livelihood of thousands of families, diminished
access to quality education, and jeopardized our land,
water, air, and wildlife. As an avid outdoorsman and father of three I understand the urgent need to restore the
balance between the environment and the economy, ensuring lasting resources for future generations. I believe
Washington needs a leader with vision and the courage
to act responsibly.
 My fi rst priority will be a forest triage, mounting a cooperative effort to thin areas of dead and unhealthy forest. This preventive maintenance reduces fi re hazards,
provides job opportunities for struggling families, and
will secure valuable resources for our state’s education
system.
I will work to remove restrictions and prohibitions, opening Washington State workers to the future of green
economic opportunity and innovation in the world’s
industrial hemp markets, renewable energy sectors, and
urban agriculture and forestry. Private stakeholders from
farmers to fi shermen will play a vital role in enacting an
effective resource plan.
Working families in Washington deserve the freedom
to provide and the opportunity to thrive. You can help
by casting your vote for active resource management in
Washington State.
For More Information:
(360) 662-6362
steven@electnielson.com
www.electnielson.com
Dave Upthegrove
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: King County
Councilmember 2013 – Present;
State Representative (33rd District)
2001 - 2013; Chair, House Environment Committee; Chair, House
Select Committee on Puget Sound.
Other Professional Experience: Senior Legislative Assistant, Washington State Senate; Basketball Referee,
Pacifi c NW Basketball Offi cials Association.
Education: B.A. Environmental Conservation (Biology
minor), University of Colorado at Boulder; Graduate Certifi cate in Energy Policy Planning, University of Idaho.
Community Service: Scoutmaster; Program Director,
Camp Parsons BSA; Matt Griffi n YMCA Board Member;
Governor’s Climate Action Team; Highline Citizens for
Schools (school bond campaign); Sponsor, Washington
Voting Rights Act; Sponsor, Marriage Equality Legislation; Humane Society Legislative Leadership Award; NW
Marine Trade Association Legislator of the Year.
Statement: It’s a critical time for our environment with
the threat of climate change, wildfi res, droughts and the
need to reduce dependence on fossil fuels. Washington’s Commissioner of Public Lands must be an environmental champion. Endorsed by the Washington Conservation Voters, I’ll be that champion.
I’ve worked my entire career combatting climate change,
supporting responsible conservation and reducing environmental impacts in diverse communities. My experience as House Environment Committee Chair prepared
me to manage public lands to protect wildlife habitat
and clean water, while harvesting timber to support
public schools. My commitment to wildfi re prevention
has earned me the sole endorsement of the State Council of Firefi ghters.
I oppose leasing state lands to facilitate fossil fuel
production. I’ll respect tribal rights and create jobs by
investing in renewable energy, not building coal terminals. My husband and I are committed to a healthy
environment for the next generation. I ask for your vote.
Endorsed: Governor Chris Gregoire, U.S. Representative Adam Smith, King County Executive Dow Constantine, Pierce County Executive Pat McCarthy, Washington
State Labor Council, Washington Federation of State
Employees, over 40 Legislators statewide. Spokane
County Democrats, King County Young Democrats, and
Democratic Districts 33, 34, 36, 37, 39 and 46.
For More Information:
(253) 334-6742
info@upthegrove.org
www.upthegrove.org
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
76 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Commissioner of Public Lands
Karen Porterfield
(Prefers Democratic Party)
______________________________
Elected Experience: No elected
experience.
Other Professional Experience:
Principal, Meta Management
Group. Associate Dean, Seattle
University College of Art and Science. Vice President,
United Way of King County. Director of Development,
Salvation Army.
Education: BA - Political Science, Western Washington
University. Master of Public Administration, Seattle
University. Executive Certifi cation - Economic and Community Development, University of Maryland.
Community Service: Bellevue College Foundation Board
- Board Vice President. Teens in Public Service Board
- Board Member. Talus HOA Board - Board Member.
Belltown Food Bank - Volunteer Executive Director.
Statement: The Commissioner of Public Lands is the
executive responsible for leading the State Department
of Natural Resources (DNR). This is a role for a proven
executive, not another politician. DNR's mission is more
than just protecting trees. It's about utilizing our public
lands to generate revenue to support our schools, colleges, and our economy.
For too long, a succession of professional politicians
has mismanaged the agency. Poorly maintained forests
and rangelands have left us fi ghting massive wildfi res,
caused loss of lives in places such as Oso and Twisp,
and generated costly lawsuits against the State - costing
us, the taxpayers, millions of dollars.
As your Commissioner, I will balance the need for preserving our environment while generating revenue for
our schools. We can meet our commitments to schools,
colleges, and the environment, but only if DNR changes
how it does business.
It's time that we take a business approach to our public
lands - not a political one. I have a vision, a plan, and
the executive experience to lead and bring fundamental
change to how the DNR operates. We need a proven
executive leadership for this executive position. Thank
you for your support.
For More Information:
(206) 790-9225
karen@karenporterfi eld.com
www.karenporterfi eld.com
Steve McLaughlin
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience:
Commander, U.S. Navy (retired) I
honorably served 25 years; Incident
Command System Instructor (10
years) I’ve trained nearly 1000 fi refi ghters and public
safety personnel in incident management; Security Systems Program Manager (10 years);
Education: B.S. University of Oregon Health and Biology; PSC Royal Naval College; M.A. (with distinction)
U.S. Naval War College
Community Service: Rotary Club of Wenatchee; Liberty Disaster Relief Services (Executive Director) Navy
League of the United States; American Alpine Club (10
years); Relief and reconstruction drives for victims of
Oso landslide and Eastern WA fi res.Chairman, Operation
Steadfast Veteran's Suicide Prevention;
Statement: Washington suffered catastrophic, record
setting wildfi re seasons. Too many communities have
been disrupted and lives, homes, livestock, forests and
wildlife were needlessly lost. Providing disaster relief in
communities affected by the Eastern WA fi res, and Oso
landslide, I realized my experience as a retired Naval
Offi cer and incident command instructor could serve the
citizens of Washington State. We need to empower our
communities in preparedness, work collaboratively to
create an integrated strategy among jurisdictions, and
use common sense deploying local resources to reduce
the risk of repeating the catastrophic fi res of the past.
Careful management of our state’s 3 million acres of
trust lands, and revenue that our forests, farms, and waters provide for school construction is an important constitutional mandate. More than half of DNR land is permanently conserved for protecting endangered species,
salmon habitat and recreation. The remaining working
forests must provide a steady stream of revenue for our
schools and protect jobs in rural communities.
The Department of Natural Resources needs positive
leadership. I will draw upon my years of executive leadership of large, diverse organizations and lead DNR as
a “servant leader.” The staff of DNR and the citizens of
Washington deserve the best.
For More Information:
(509) 885-4541
Steve@mac4lands.org
www.mac4lands.org
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
7 7 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
John Stillings
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: John served for
ten years as U.S. Olympians and
Paralympians Washington Chapter
President. He also served as St.
Vincent dePaul Society Council of
Seattle/King County President
Other Professional Experience: He has been a General
Contractor for 32 years in Washington. John won an
Olympic Silver Medal 1984, is married to Olympic Gold
medalist Betsy Beard Stillings and is the parent of two
sons
Education: B. A. Mathematics, University of Washington: B. A. Philosophy, University of Washington
Community Service: Volunteer for St. Vincent dePaul
Society, Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, Olympians
for Olympians Relief Fund and U. S. Olympians and
Paralympians Association
Statement: We share borders with two states, another
country and an ocean and we owe sustainability to the
lands we steward. Our public trust lands are the endowment for our children and future generations. Funding
locally, nationally and globally to preserve this resource
has been woefully inadequate.
The DNR is the largest fi refi ghting agency in the state
and we need to do so much more to protect our forestland. The immediacy of interagency response to wildfi res is imperative. Funding to reduce wildfi re fuel loads
is inadequate. Sequestering carbon in our living forests
and our building industry works. 13-50% of our statewide carbon emissions from wildfi re does not work.
Rising sea level is a real and present threat to our tidelands. John offers a voice for global action on the issue
of climate change and comprehensive accountability.
John has a demonstrated ability to lead. He will advocate for all of us demanding accountability from all the
titleholders of our trust lands. All hands on deck. We are
all in together
For More Information:
(206) 519-4993
sundancejs@comcast.net
sudancejs.wix.com/publiclands
Video
Voters'
Guide
Improperly marked ballots cost you
money.
Ballots marked incorrectly can’t be read
by the ballot tabulators. Additional
processing time is required to be able
to count your vote.
Connect the arrow using a single line.
Don’t use these marks:
Mark your ballot
correctly!
x’s
circles too light
too heavy
check marks
end of office
Commissioner of Public Lands
7 8 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Superintendent of Public Instruction
John Patterson Blair
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Vashon School
Board 2000-04
Other Professional Experience:
High School Science Teacher
1969-77; Developed and taught a
high school special education to
mainstream science transition curriculum 1970–72; Teachers (NEA) negotiator 1970-72; A
founding and participating teacher (science), Cinnaminson (NJ) Alternative High School for 170+ 10th-12th
grade students who wanted to take responsibility for
their own education 1972-76; Candidate for Superintendent of Public Instruction 2004,8,12, average 75,000
votes, 7% statewide.
Education: Haverford College, BA Sociology; Temple
University, MEd Science.
Community Service: A founding and participating parent, Vashon (WA) Parent Involvement Program, Alternative Elementary School (40 students) 1983-90
Statement: This Is A Referendum: Every child is unique
and families should have the opportunity to individualize their own children’s public education.
I propose A New Foundation for Public Education, (of
which existing public schools would be an unchanged
part), consisting of:
Individual Student Trust Accounts – funded annually
using each student’s existing $10,000+ state education voucher. With approval, each student’s parents
may spend these accumulating funds at any Registered
Public Education Program(s) of their choice. Registered
Public Education Programs – defi ned as, any educational
program, regardless of ownership, which: Accepts only
trust funds as tuition, i.e. “free”; Fills at least 80% of its
openings without admission qualifi cation, i.e. “open enrollment”; Permits the study, but not the practice, of religion; And publishes measurable educational and behavioral goals for its students. Students not achieving these
goals may be dismissed by the program. Neighborhood
Education Districts – administered by three locally elected trustees, will oversee the educational progress of 50
to 200 participating neighborhood students. The trustees
must approve parental education choices for students
passing applicable "WASL" tests. Community Facility
Districts – locally elected, will own, operate and maintain
all public facilities. Life-cycle maintenance funds will be
included in the original bond funding.
Interested? Vote for me.
For More Information:
(206) 391-8780
JohnBlair@ANewFoundationWashington.org
Chris Reykdal
_________________________________
Elected Experience:Tumwater
School Board; Washington State
House of Representatives - Vice
Chair of the House Education Committee; Higher Education Committee; Finance Committee; Formerly
served on the Education Appropriations Committee.
Other Professional Experience: Classroom teacher
(James Madison Teaching Fellowship Finalist); Education Budget and Finance Executive, State Board for
Community and Technical Colleges.
Education: Baccalaureate Degree in Social Studies and
a Washington State Teaching Certifi cate, Washington
State University; Masters Degree in Public Administration with an emphasis on budget, fi nance, and performance management, University of North Carolina
- Chapel Hill.
Community Service: Parent volunteer in schools, coach,
former planning commissioner, and non-profi t fundraiser.
Statement: Every child deserves a high quality education! I’m Chris Reykdal, and I’d like to earn your vote
to be our State’s next Superintendent of Schools. I’ve
dedicated my 20 year career as an educator and education fi nance executive to helping students achieve their
dreams. The next Superintendent must be an education
policy and budget leader to ensure local control, effective results, and accountability of your tax dollars!
We must do three things to ensure opportunity for all
kids: 1) Equitably fund our schools! It’s time to build
bipartisan support for school funding while reducing our
dependence on exceedingly high local property taxes. A
child’s education should never depend on the wealth of
their neighborhood; 2) Reduce excessive standardized
testing so teachers have time to engage students and
support their individual needs; 3) Return high quality
career and technical education programs to our schools.
To improve graduation rates, students need career pathways they are passionate about!
I will be the fi rst Superintendent in 30 years to actually
have kids in public school during my service. I will work
hard to ensure that all kids, teachers, support staff, and
parents are fully supported in our schools. Thank you for
your consideration.
For More Information:
(360) 790-3151
chris4wakids@gmail.com
www.ChrisReykdal.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide Video
Voters'
Guide
7 9 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Superintendent of Public Instruction
Ron Higgins
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Placed second
in 2012 OSPI election
Other Professional Experience:
Certifi cated Math Teacher in Washington and California; Substitute
taught all grades, pre-K through
12th; nearly all subjects, including
bi-lingual and special education, in dozens of Washington schools, including juvenile justice center; taught in
public and charter schools in inner city Los Angeles.
School bus driver; Marine Corps helicopter pilot in Vietnam, training offi cer, retired reserve Lieutenant Colonel;
instructor/examiner for Naval and civilian reactor operators
Education: Two MS degrees, one in Chemical Engineering from the University of Washington
Community Service: Boy Scout leader; Youth Soccer
Referee; Blood Platelet Donor; Union Gospel Mission
volunteer; dedicated recycler
Statement: Schools should produce men and women
skilled in communication, computation, and civics, so
they become contributing citizens in our Constitutional
Republic, knowledgeable of the principles of liberty
upon which our country is based; people who know
how to learn, since schooling ends, but learning never
should; people who think for themselves, while being
able to work well with others; people who have the courage to stand by the truth, even when unpopular.
I plan to: protect the health, safety, and Constitutional
rights of students; connect students to the principles of
liberty in the Declaration of Independence and US Constitution; promote sobriety and healthy lifestyles; protect
personnel from violence; affi rm the authority of parents
over the education of their children; treat boys as boys
and girls as girls; affi rm educators’ rights to voluntarily
join, or not join, unions; establish a path to graduation
for students not planning on college; reduce teachers’
administrative burdens; enhance teachers’ career fl exibility; and maintain high literary standards.
I oppose: mandatory vaccinations; federal involvement
in education; and government-controlled early childhood education.
I support: parental right to homeschool; the concept of
charter schools; and local control of education. I believe
in Common Sense, not Common Core!
For More Information:
(509) 578-4738
educate@higgins4spi.com
www.higgins4spi.com
Grazyna Prouty
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Political experience profound: links practice
of legal industry dismissing laws,
standards, and evidence in relation
to education, rights of teachers,
citizens
Other Professional Experience:
Early Childhood Education (8 years) , K-12 (elementary,
junior high, high school certifi ed teacher with six endorsements including English, Early Childhood Education, teaching ESL (ELL), Bilingual; College Instructor
Profi cient: English, Polish, Russian ( speaking, writing,
reading), familiarity: Latin, German, French, Spanish
Education: MBA (Master of Business Administration),
Global Management, City University of Seattle; the
second Master's degree in English Philology: English,
American Literature, Linguistics - Phonetics, Phonology,
Education
Community Service: Volunteering, open letters, testimonies.
Statement: Grazyna credits Polish family (grandparents'
twelve children: eight plus four) and Polish teachers for
teaching decency, honor, humility, resilience. Gratitude
goes to professors at the City University of Seattle MBA
Program: for transformations as dark side of leadership surface: ability to identify systems that lack quality,
accountability, transparent budgets (participated: W.
Edwards Deming's red bead experiment, there).
Grazyna's experience and research of planned agendas,
the latest Agenda 21: Bankrupting America into Utopia:
One City at a Time, Alexandra Swann, Rosa Koire; John
Taylor Gatto: "Ultimate History Lesson of American Education " that theme across with works of Beverly Eakman
"Cloning American Mind. Eradicating Morality through
Education," Charlotte Iserbyt "How We Got Here," "ABCs
of Dumbed Down".
Grazyna communicated 'voluntary' (mandated) Agenda
21 through Open Letters to schools, cities as they implement it with contempt for public, "Common Core: Based
on Agenda 21, UNESCO Standards."
Grazyna is against charter schools (unelected boards),
Academic Child Abuse (Engelman), Blumenfeld: NEA,
standardized testing: examine Candice Bernd: Morna
McDermott's Flow Chart matching stop Agenda 21 -
Tom DeWeese. Public 'homework" results in awareness on developed 'pipelines' that require push-back as
multi-faceted endeavors connect both broad research
and experience Grazyna has and 'offi cial language"
('Amtssprache).'
For More Information:
(206) 482-7313
grazyna.ospi@gmail.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
8 0 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Superintendent of Public Instruction
Robin Fleming
_________________________________
Elected Experience: First time candidate
Other Professional Experience:
For 13 years, Fleming served the
state’s most vulnerable children as
a school nurse; created innovative
programs and curricula for immigrant and low-income
students; and published award-winning research on
academic and health disparities. At OSPI, Fleming leads
statewide school health services, initiating integration of
education and health systems to produce powerful educational results for students. Fleming serves on faculty
at the University of Washington.
Education: PhD, Educational Leadership and Policy, University of Washington
Community Service: Boards: Hilltop Preschool; John
Hay Elementary. Award from Economic Opportunity Institute for helping pass Seattle’s sick and safe leave law.
Statement: A native Washingtonian, I was raised by
a single mother who worked three jobs to make ends
meet. My older brother had Down Syndrome and was
institutionalized at the age of 5. This inspired me to become a school nurse, educator and policy advisor.
As Superintendent of Public Instruction, I will fully and
equitably fund all schools; ensure that students receive
needed supports to improve attendance and achievement; invest in early learning; and improve working conditions and pay for teachers. I have a consistent record
of achieving successes in challenging circumstances
-- and I will repeat that in this position. Our children’s
futures -- and Washington’s economy -- depend upon it.
It’s time to elect people who have worked extensively
in our schools – instead of politicians – to oversee our
school system. If you’re happy with public schools, you
will get more of the same by voting for a candidate with
a political agenda. My only agenda is to improve the life
opportunities for all of our state’s children – and I am the
only candidate with the qualifi cations and experience to
make that happen. A vote for me is a vote for our children, and for our state’s future.
For More Information:
(206) 235-5516
voterobinfl eming@gmail.com
robinfl eming.org
Al Runte
_________________________________
Elected Experience: No information
submitted
Other Professional Experience: Not
a politician, Dr. Al Runte is a nationally recognized educator, historian
and author who would lead reform
of our public schools. An environmental historian, Dr. Runte was prominently featured
in Ken Burns’s popular PBS TV series on national parks.
He’s authored fi ve books including: National Parks: The
American Experience and is: former University of Washington Assistant Professor of History; former Assistant
Director of Environmental Studies, Baylor University;
former Director: National Parks Conservation Association and National Association of Railroad Passengers
Education: B.A. Binghamton University; M.A. Illinois
State University; Ph.D. University of California, Santa
Barbara
Community Service: Member, Seattle Neighborhood
Coalition
Statement: My roots come from a family deeply committed to education. My mother had a 23-year career
with New York’s public schools, and in retirement served
on her local school board. My brother taught middle
school math for 10 years. I began my education career
teaching high school history. My university courses at
UW were highly rated by students. Why? Teaching is all
about holding students’ interest in learning challenging
subject matter.
Smaller class sizes are nice. What is taught and learned
inside the classroom is more important. National-testdriven schools cannot possibly recognize that every
child, teacher, state and community is different.
It is unacceptable that children today, due to faulty curriculums and inadequately compensated teachers, are
not getting the basic education they deserve. As Superintendent I would place increased emphasis on providing quality classroom teaching and eliminate excessive
bureaucratic rules that only hinder good teaching.
Needed reform is long overdue. All students have a
right to an excellent education. That means having the
opportunity to learn to read, write and be profi cient in
basic math, science and civics (yes, including American
history). Everyone should look back at their schooling as
contributing to their success in life.
For More Information:
(206) 719-2846
alfred_runte@msn.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
8 1 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Superintendent of Public Instruction
Erin Jones
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Erin Jones is a
state and national award winning
teacher and district/state administrator. She has never sought
elected offi ce.
Other Professional Experience:
AVID District Director, Tacoma
Public Schools; Director of Equity, Federal Way Public
Schools; Assistant Superintendent of Student Achievement and Director, OSPI; Instructional Coach, Spokane
Public Schools; Substitute and Classroom Teacher,
Tacoma; Teacher, South Bend, IN.
Education: BA, Bryn Mawr College; Teaching Certifi cate,
PLU.
Community Service: Youth ministry leader, 1993-2006,
YoungLife leader, 2006-2008. Board member; Girl
Scouts of Western Washington, College Spark, Recruiting Washington Teachers, Center for the Strengthening
of Teaching Profession, Washington Alliance of Black
School Educators.
Statement: Every Washington child deserves a great
education, regardless of where they live, their household income or the color of their skin. A child's zip code
must no longer be the greatest predictor of their educational success and future income.
I am the only candidate for OSPI who has dedicated a
career to educating students, closing opportunity gaps
and improving outcomes. I have worked as a classroom
teacher on both sides of the Cascades, an Assistant
Superintendent at OSPI, and an administrator in districts
with high-poverty and diverse populations.
I am not a politician but an educator and parent of recent
public school graduates, convinced we need leadership
in Olympia dedicated to helping students succeed, not a
political agenda. With your vote, I will apply my passion
and experience to demand legislators drop excuses and
fully fund our schools, work to replace punitive testing
with fair assessment tools, close opportunity gaps wherever they exist, and expand public school options and
excellence statewide.
My vision and unmatched commitment is endorsed by
King and Snohomish County Democrats, classroom
teachers, school board members, principals and administrators statewide, a bipartisan coalition of current and
former legislators, PTA leaders, students and parents
across Washington!
For More Information:
(360) 918-3498
Erinjonesin2016@gmail.com
www.ErinJones2016.org
KumRoon (Mr. Mak)
Maksirisombat
_________________________________
Elected Experience: I'm looking
forward to representing Washington State.
Other Professional Experience:
Teacher: English as a Second Language, Special Education, Math, Science, Chinese, Thai; Counselor; School
AdministratorAdjunct Professor at Seattle Pacifi c University; Professional Educational Advisory Board at City
University; Professor South Seattle Community College
US Government Selective Service Board Member; Boeing Manufacturing and Technology Intern; City of Seattle
Health and Nutrition Project Site Coordinator; Yale University Leadership and Development Training
Education: B.S. Business and Sociology, M.S. Special
Education and Counseling: Montana State University.
PhD. International Business, Warren National University.
Community Service: 19 year volunteer: Fernwood at the
Park / Normandy Park Senior Living.
Statement: Every student in Washington State deserves
the opportunity to succeed. In fact, we voters consistently show we believe this by passing initiatives to increase
school funding. Having served in public schools for over
30 years holding many different positions, earning a
distinguished educator among other awards, this is the
least funding I have seen actually reach the students
during my tenure. We are failing our students.
I see large amounts of administrative waste. I see students who have the capability to achieve smothered by
ineffi ciency and lack of passion for the learning experience. Teachers and Instructional Assistants do not
have the support they need to be motivated, creative
members of the educational workforce. Instead, they are
buried under paperwork.
Who you voters elect to this position next will determine
if we can make the necessary changes to assure that all
state school programs work together to reinstate what
has been a lost focus of our schools: to create world
class citizens.
Under my leadership, the OSPI offi ce will work to improve graduation rate, increase vocational education,
fi nd and eliminate waste, and hold funding spenders
accountable for student experience and outcomes. I ask
for your support in this crucial time.
For More Information:
(206) 501-5804
ibackmak@gmail.com
ibackmak.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
8 2 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
David Spring
_________________________________
Elected Experience: 5th LD Representative to the King County Legislative Action Committee.
Other Professional Experience:
Instructor, Bellevue College,
Researcher, University of Washington, Author, Weapons of Mass
Deception, a book exposing the corporate takeover of
our public schools.
Education: Washington State University: Bachelor of
Science Education, University of Washington: Master’s
Degree in Education.
Community Service: As Director of the Coalition to Protect our Public Schools, I've spent the past 8 years advocating for school funding in Olympia. I wrote the only
bill which would have fully funded our schools - Senate
Bill 6093. I am also a leader of Opt Out Washington, an
organization opposed to the draconian SBAC test.
Statement: Our children are forced to endure some of
the lowest funded, most overcrowded schools in the
nation. Severely overcrowded classrooms prevent struggling students from getting the help they need. Precious
tax dollars that should go toward schools have instead
been diverted, by our corporate dominated legislature,
into billions in tax breaks for wealthy multinational corporations. Our legislature gives away four dollars in tax
breaks for every dollar they invest in our schools.
Olympia politicians keep kicking the can down the road
by forming more fake education funding committees. It
is time to recognize that politicians in Olympia are never
going to fund our schools.
I am running for Superintendent to end this corrupt corporate welfare scheme by going around the legislature
and directly to our Supreme Court asking them to repeal
illegal tax breaks in order to immediately restore school
funding - so we can reduce class sizes so struggling students can fi nally get the help they need to succeed.
I am the only candidate for Superintendent with a real
plan to fully fund our schools, provide students with free
higher education, end toxic high stakes tests and clean
up corruption in Olympia. Please visit our website for
more information!
For More Information:
(425) 876-9149
david@springforbetterschools.org
springforbetterschools.org
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
Superintendent of Public Instruction
8 3 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Insurance Commissioner
Mike Kreidler
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Served as Insurance Commissioner since 2001.
Also served as a North Thurston
School Board member, State Representative and Senator for the 22nd
Legislative District and U.S. Representative for the 9th Congressional District.
Other Professional Experience: Worked as an optometrist for 20 years; small-business owner; served as Director, Region 10, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.
Education: Bachelor’s degree and Doctor of Optometry
degree from Pacifi c University; master’s degree in Public
Health from UCLA.
Community Service: Retired U.S. Army Reserve lieutenant colonel with 20 years of service. Active member of a
number of community service organizations.
Statement: Mike Kreidler is a strong and independent
voice willing to stand up to powerful industry interests
as an advocate for insurance consumers. In his fi rst four
terms as insurance commissioner, Mike Kreidler saved
consumers in our state over $300 million in auto and
homeowners’ insurance by cutting excessive premium
rates. His consumer protection staff has helped thousands of Washingtonians with insurance problems,
recovering over $160 million in wrongfully delayed or
denied claims.
The people of our state deserve quality, affordable
health insurance. Mike Kreidler has worked tirelessly to
make sure that insurance companies can no longer deny
coverage. He is proposing legislation to stop patients
from receiving surprise bills resulting from emergency
medical services. He will continue working with community, business and legislative leaders to further improve
access to affordable health care and reduce the number
of uninsured in our state.
Mike Kreidler is a proven leader who has served the
people of Washington with dedication, fairness and hard
work. That’s why he consistently earns endorsements
from consumer, labor, business, retiree, educational
and health care organizations and individuals across our
state.
Please join them by electing Mike Kreidler to another
term as your Insurance Commissioner.
For More Information:
(360) 819-6956
mike@mikekreidler.com
www.mikekreidler.com
Justin Murta
(Prefers Libertarian Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience: Currently the Account Manager, Benefi ts West; Owner of Button Pushers
Entertainment; Murta Services and
Red Pill Records; former teacher at Sunderland University; Account Executive at Benefi ts West; Sales Coordinator at Health Care Management Administrators and
Regence Group Administrators; United States Marine
Corps veteran.
Education: Graduate East Lake High School, Sammamish, WA. Graduate of the University of Missouri’s
HSSMTI, Attended Bellevue College and Sunderland
University.
Community Service: Toys for Tots, Saigon Children’s
Charity, Stop the Traffi c and Walk for Life (2015)
Statement: I have always been an advocate for reform
and equity in the Insurance Industry. I have worked
in the insurance industry both as an agent and as an
employee benefi t consultant. I have sadly witnessed a
decline in the health and welfare of our state’s citizens.
Washington is in the lowest percentile for all 50 states in
terms of performance, affordability and coverage opportunities caused in most part by political infi ghting,
workers’ comp issues, excessive rate regulation, and
underwriting restrictions.
The Affordable Care Act has done nothing to address
the aging population or the growing dilemma of provider shortages. Rather, it has forced many into the Social
Security Benefi ts earlier and is siphoning funds away
from our Seniors and Veterans. I want to reform our current system. I want the increased benefi ts and reduced
rates that market choices will bring us, as well as the
freedom to choose our own health insurance.
I want to combat the evils of Tort Law, the excessive
spending on defunct government programs and stop
corrupt crony political practices from killing our State’s
insurance options. I want to provide honest hardworking citizens with affordable insurance coverage. Help me
bring sanity to our insurance market.
For More Information:
(425) 377-6304
justinmurta@gmail.com
www.electjustinmurta.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
8 4 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Insurance Commissioner
Richard Schrock
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Richard
Schrock is serving his second term
as Commissioner of Snohomish
County Fire District No. 1, one of
state’s largest regional fi re departments.
Other Professional Experience: Richard Schrock served
four years as Director, Washington State Department of
Commerce (under Governor John Spellman). He successfully led state efforts to grow international trade,
promote tourism, and attract new businesses to Washington creating thousands of new jobs. Professional
communications consultant who advises businesses,
government agencies and non-profi ts.
Education: St. Martins College, Political Science
Community Service: Board member, Snohomish County
Emergency Radio System (SERS). Founding Board
Member of the Lake Stickney Conservancy and Sno-King
Watershed Council
Statement: Paying too much for insurance? Do you
want four more years of the same 16-year policy direction that governs the state agency that regulates insurance companies?
Washington’s health insurance rates are proposed to
rise another 19% next year. Richard Schrock, as Washington’s next Insurance Commissioner, will fi ght unjustifi ed premium increases, hold down deductibles and
limit co-pays.
In 2013, highly respected Seattle Children’s Hospital
waged a successful legal battle with the Insurance Commissioner’s Offi ce and three major insurers. Children’s,
the region’s premier pediatric hospital, took legal action
to get their insured child patients covered by Commissioner-approved insurance plans that had excluded Children’s from service provider networks. In 2014, newspapers reported that a whistleblower compliant revealed
scandalous conduct within the Offi ce of the Insurance
Commissioner involving “major systemic problems”.
Our state’s largest newspaper subsequently called for
“major reforms” that have not happened.
Obviously, policy changes are long overdue to broaden
access to affordable coverage. If elected Commissioner,
Richard Schrock will institute reforms that prevent powerful special interests from infl uencing agency decisions,
vigorously enforce consumer protection laws, and mandate expanding healthcare service- provider networks.
Future appeals of Commissioner decisions must be
fairly and transparently decided by independent, impartial judges.
For More Information:
(425) 745-9380
Richard@commissionerschrock.com
commissionerschrock.com
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
8 5 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
2nd Legislative District, State Senator
Randi Becker
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Senator,
2009- present. Chair, Senate Health
Care Committee. Randi opposed
tax increases, voted to uphold the
two-thirds to raise taxes, and secured funding for Pierce County
 Skill Center and Yelm Loop.
Other Professional Experience: Randi worked for 24
years in the medical fi eld, managing multi-million dollar
budgets as a medical practice administrator.
Education: Attended Green River Community College,
business studies; and continuing education during her
career in the medical fi eld.
Community Service: Active participant in local Chambers of Commerce and service clubs, Graham Business
Association, Washington State Historical Society Board,
Backcountry Horsemen, and Dollars for Scholars auctions.
Statement: I'm not a career politician. I had a full career
in real estate and medical administration before running for elected offi ce. But, when my neighbors wanted
someone to speak for them in Olympia, I decided it was
time to give back to my community.
In the State Senate, I've worked hard to get results:
protecting our individual rights and working with legislators from both parties for practical solutions. I haven't
missed a vote in six years. We increased school funding
without raising taxes, lowered college tuition, and made
strong investments in transportation. I wrote a law to
crack down on red light cameras that were set to trap
motorists into paying big fi nes.
As Health Care Committee Chair, the patient is my number one priority. My telemedicine legislation was signed
into law, to help bring the expertise of world-class specialists to rural areas and small towns. Four years from
now, I'd like families and property owners to be able to
say-thanks to Randi; I have more freedom to live my life
without government interference.
Randi is an avid fi sher, hunter and NRA member. She
and her husband, Bob, live on a small farm near Eatonville.
For More Information:
(253) 208-6500
rbecker44106@gmail.com
randibecker.com
Tamborine Borrelli
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: This is the fi rst
time I have been moved to participate in elected politics.
Other Professional Experience: I
was the owner of a Fitness and Personal Chef business. I was the lead of a large team at a
successful skin care company. I currently rescue animals
that have been abandoned and neglected and I am the
owner of an organic pet treat company.
Education: I studied psychology at USM in California.
Community Service: I created an after-school program
for underprivileged girls, worked heavily in Rescue, and
created a Community Center emphasizing Theater, Music and Dance for all ages.
Statement: Like many of you, I’m disappointed with our
political system. There’s too much money in politics and
our Senate failed to address the important issues our
communities face. I got involved in politics to overturn
Citizens United and bring power back to the people. I
want to be your champion in the Senate, standing up
for what is right, what is just, and what will benefi t our
entire community. Our children matter. Their education
matters. I will fully fund our public education system to
ensure all our children succeed; something our current
Senator has failed to do. It’s time for a new approach.
Our tax system is unfair. We must create a fairer tax
system that benefi ts the hard-working people of the
district, not corporations that send jobs out of state. We
also have a moral obligation to protect our environment.
I will work to attract green manufacturing and green
jobs. We should be fearless in our pursuit of industrial
hemp, using it to create good paying jobs in our district.
The status quo has not solved our problems, I will. I will
serve with integrity and passion and get results. I ask for
your vote.
For More Information:
(360) 977-2168
contact@tamborine2016.com
tamborine2016.com
continued
8 6 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Marilyn Rasmussen
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Sixteen years
as State Senator; Six years as
State Representative; Seven years
on the Eatonville School Board
Other Professional Experience:
Lived and worked on our family farm for 56 years;
Cattle, local hay and forestry
Education: Attended University of Washington; Roosevelt High in Seattle
Community Service: 25 year member of Ohop Grange;
Marymount Senior Housing Board (28 YEARS); Our
Lady of Good Council Catholic Church / St. Ann's Altar
Society; Served on Presidents Council St. Martins University; Bethel Education Scholarship Board (20 years)
Advocate for Autism / Univ. of Washington Autism Center; Chamber of Commerce / Yelm, Eatonville. Tacoma/
Pierce
Statement: Thank you for your support over the years.
I am energized and wish to represent our district by
reclaiming the Senate position.
I am the mother of seven, grandmother of nineteen, a
farmer and former Legislator from the 2nd District. I
know the value of hard work and getting the job done.
Education is the upmost priority and fully funding is a
moral and legal responsibility. I am a strong supporter
of vocational education and skill centers. We must budget wisely and put our children fi rst. I will be that tough
voice our families and schools need and deserve for all
our children. I am dedicated to public safety, improving roads, protecting our tax dollars and jobs and small
businesses. I will make sure government services are
delivered effectively.
I have a proven record of getting the job done and
always being there for you. My pledge to you is to be
accessible, listen, work hard with honesty and integrity.
I am ready to work for you. My warmest regards and I
treasure your support and friendship.
For More Information:
(253) 847-3276
marilyn@rainierconnect.com
www.marilyn4senate.com
end of office
2nd Legislative District, State Senator
8 7 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
2nd Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 1
Amy Pivetta Hoffman
(Prefers Independent Dem.
 Party) _________________________________
Elected Experience: Vice President,
Bethel School Board, 2016; Board
Member, Bethel School District,
2013 to present
Other Professional Experience: Amy is a successful
small business owner and attorney. She owns APH Law
PLLC, helping South Sound companies navigate business law and solve tough legal problems.
Education: Juris Doctor, Alexander Blewett III School
of Law at the University of Montana; Bachelor of Arts,
University of Washington.
Community Service: Past President, Frederickson Clover
Creek Community Council; Member, Frederickson Land
Use Advisory Commission (appointed by Pierce County
Council); Board Member, South County Branch of Tacoma-Pierce County Chamber of Commerce; Secretary,
Friends of Stan and Joan Cross Park.
Statement: I’ve spent my career solving problems for
businesses and community organizations. On the Bethel
School Board and in my own law practice, I’ve never
been afraid to take on big challenges, and I pledge to always put the views of my district ahead of party leaders
and special interests.
Every Washington student deserves a quality education. Every local business should have the workforce
and infrastructure they need to innovate and grow. We
must bring down crime rates and ensure our veterans
aren’t forgotten. I know we can do better, and I would be
honored to earn your vote.
For More Information:
(253) 213-3767
friendsofaph@gmail.com
electamy.org
Andrew Barkis
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Appointed,
Washington House of Representatives, Legislative District 2, 2016.
Other Professional Experience:
Owner/Designated Broker at Home-
 town Property Management.
Education: Centralia College, AA Degree; Seattle University, BA in Communications; US Army ROTC, Chieftain
Battalion. Proud graduate of the Chehalis School District.
Community Service: Boardmember, Boys and Girls Club
of Thurston County; Boardmember, Homes First; Past
Scoutmaster, Boy Scouts of America Troop 222; Former
President, Lacey Chamber of Commerce. Andrew is also
involved with Lacey Sunrise Lions, Lacey Gateway Rotary; active member of Lacey, Yelm, and Thurston County
Chambers of Commerce. Please visit electAndrewBarkis.
org to learn more about Andrew’s community service.
Statement: Andrew Barkis is our newest state legislator but he’s been a leader in our community for years.
Last session, Andrew helped pass laws that promoted
job growth and he voted for a balanced budget that put
schools fi rst.
With your vote, he’ll return to the legislature and work to
repair our state’s broken school funding mechanism that
fails to fund rural schools in our community. He will also
work to make it easier for small businesses to succeed.
Andrew and his wife Lisa have two sons and live in rural
Thurston County. They attend New Bridge Community
Church.
For More Information:
(253) 533-7410
Andrew.Barkis@electAndrewBarkis.org
www.electAndrewBarkis.org
end of office
8 8 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
2nd Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 2
JT Wilcox
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: JT has served
three terms as our State Representative. He now serves as Minority
Floor Leader for the Republican
Caucus.
Other Professional Experience: JT has managed a variety of business enterprises during his 25 years with his
family business, Wilcox Farms, including Chief Financial
Offi cer.
Education: Graduated from Yelm High School; BA in
History from Washington State University.
Community Service: Trustee of the Washington State
Historical Society; Former President, Yelm Lions Club;
Former volunteer fi reman; He was awarded an Honorary
Chapter Farmer degree by the Yelm FFA and has served
on several school district committees.
Statement: JT Wilcox has served the people of our community for six years, today he’s asking for our vote to
remain one of Washington’s most effective lawmakers.
As Republican Floor Leader, JT is known for his work
protecting rural jobs and for helping balance the state
budget.
The Wilcox family has farmed along the banks of the
Nisqually River for over 100 years. JT learned many
valuable lessons from working on the farm, including
how to deal with diffi cult times and the need to balance
a budget. We all know that Washington needs family
farm values.
For More Information:
(253) 229-1467
JT@JTWilcox.org
JTWilcox.org
Nathaniel Downes
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: I was elected
as a Sanders delegate for the LD02
116th precinct, and have have
worked for various campaigns as a
volunteer since 1992.
Other Professional Experience: An entrepreneur and a
political writer for several news aggregator websites,
such as Addicting Info and Reverb Press. As an entrepreneur, have overseen the growth of a start up to a
half-million in revenue within the fi rst year, with the
enterprise working on a community-developed online
multiplayer role-playing game. As a writer, several times
have read, analyzed, and written about legislature before the politicians debating the measure.
Education: No information submitted
Community Service: No information submitted
Statement: This is an election year of change. The
insurgent campaigns among both parties demonstrate
this shift, and the need for politicians able to refl ect the
changes which are as inevitable as time itself. Indeed,
the only certainty in this world is just that - change.
This is a nation founded on Freedom, but how much
Freedom is enjoyed by the homeless? How much is
enjoyed by the unemployed? How much by the sick
and disabled? How much by those disenfranchised or
marginalized by ignorance and fear? Washingtonians
have had enough. It is time We the People fi xed our
problems, together.
For More Information:
(206) 890-9255
votedownes@gmail.com
http://www.votedownes.com
continued
8 9 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Derek Maynes
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: No information
submitted
Other Professional Experience: Service before self- 12 year Air Force
Veteran who was medically retired
in 2007. Department of Defense- Flightline Maintenance
Manager for the F-22 Test and Evaluation Program.
Boeing-Tube, Duct and Reservoir Program Manager for
the KC-46A Tanker and 777X programs. Northrop Grumman- Integrated Program Team Manager. Small business owner- current. I have managed budgets as large
as $552 million to as small as $10k. No matter the budget size, leadership, integrity, transparency, and communication have been key to my professional success.
Education: Bachelor of Science, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University Graduated Cum Laude
Community Service: No information submitted
Statement: My Air Force career was cut short by ulcerative colitis and subsequent medical retirement in 2007.
Even though my military career was shortened, my
desire to continue to serve has never waned.
Integrity, service before self, excellence in all we do.
These are core values of the Air Force, values that the
Air Force instilled in me and values that continue defi ne
who I am today. Coupling these values with my leadership experience makes me the ideal candidate to lead
the 2nd Legislative District into the future. I am asking
you to give me the opportunity to serve again.
For More Information:
(253) 441-1915
contact@derekmaynes.com
www.derekmaynes.com
2nd Legislative District,
State Representative, Position No. 2 end of office
9 0 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
25th Legislative District, State Senator
Karl Mecklenburg
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: First time candidate; not a politician.
Other Professional Experience:
I Started working at age 12 as a
paperboy and farm laborer, U.S. Air
Force, Business Owner, 20 years as a Business Consultant and Recruiter. Currently Executive Recruiter-V.P. at
Bank of America.
Education: Graduated from Puyallup High School, U.S.
Air Force Medical training during the fi rst Gulf War.
Earned my college degree while supporting my family.
Community Service: Director of Community Outreach at
New Horizon Church in Fife. Built a team to provide food
and other resources to the homeless and low-income
families. 14 years coaching youth soccer.
Statement: I’m a 4th generation Puyallup area resident.
Raised in a low-income household, I was taught a strong
work ethic and the value of a great education. Education should level the playing fi eld, but the legislature’s
refusal to fund our public schools prevents a generation
of Washingtonians from getting a fair shot at success.
America will fall behind the rest of the world if we don’t
do more to educate the next generation of leaders and
innovators.
In Pierce County, we have some of the most underfunded schools in the state – and the legislature hasn’t
done nearly enough to fi x the problem. In the Senate,
I’ll stand up and demand that we get our fair share of
funding.
We need progress on so many other issues as well:
transportation to get people to work and goods to
market; same pay for same work for women; increasing
the minimum wage; and allowing workers to earn sick
leave.
Instead of bashing the other party, I want to work
together to get things done. As an experienced negotiator, I’ll reach across the party divide and put an end to
politics as usual. If you agree with me, please join this
campaign.
For More Information:
(253) 720-7859
electmeck@gmail.com
www.electmeck.com
Hans Zeiger
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Hans Zeiger
is our state representative, having served on the Transportation,
Higher Education, Rules, and Community Development, Housing, and
Tribal Affairs committees.
Other Professional Experience: Hans leads the Chapman
Center for Citizen Leadership and he serves in the Washington Air National Guard.
Education: Puyallup High School; BA, Hillsdale College;
Master’s in Public Policy, Pepperdine University
Community Service: Hans serves on the Puyallup Cares
board. He has volunteered for the South Hill Historical
Society and the Meeker Mansion. He was a columnist for
the Puyallup Herald, and he is a member of the Kiwanis
Club of Puyallup. He is an Eagle Scout.
Statement: Representative Hans Zeiger is working to
strengthen our communities, not our bureaucracies.
As the son, grandson and great-grandson of Puyallup
teachers—and as a new dad—Hans knows the value of
education, work and public service.
Hans has a proven record of working with people in
both parties to reform government. He championed
funding for the completion of Highway 167 while pushing for reforms to the DOT. He worked to engage the
private sector in solving some of our biggest public
problems. He passed legislation to strengthen partnerships between schools and communities. He sponsored
bills to help veterans, fi refi ghters, college students, and
low-income families.
Hans will go to work in the State Senate to fully fund our
schools, to demand results in state programs on homelessness, and to improve public safety in our neighborhoods. Hans knows that the best solutions to today’s
problems happen when neighbors work together.
Today Washington needs a renewed commitment to service—in our communities, our houses of worship, our
workplaces, and most of all our families. Hans knows
that his most important calling is as a husband to Erin,
dad to baby Clara, and stepdad to Cullen and Kannen.
For More Information:
(253) 905-8160
hans@hanszeiger.com
www.hanszeiger.com
end of office
9 1 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Jamie Smith
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: First time candidate; not a politician.
Other Professional Experience: I
work with the Congressional Medal
of Honor Foundation developing
courage, commitment, citizenship, integrity, patriotism,
and sacrifi ce in students throughout our nation. Tenyear teacher and coach, PHS.
Education: Pacifi c Lutheran University; Bachelor’s,
magna cum laude; Master’s, Education.
Community Service: I’m from a family of teachers,
nurses, veterans, and police offi cers. I coach cross
country and track and volunteer at basketball games. I
am a member of the Puyallup United Methodist Church,
where I work with the young adult group, raise money
to support a women’s shelter, youth mission trips, and
service projects.
Statement: Education funding and policy are the largest issues facing state lawmakers today, and it is past
time we sent a classroom teacher to the State House.
As a teacher at Puyallup High School, I have seen how
the decisions the legislature makes impact our students
every day.
We must do better. I will work with both Republicans
and Democrats in Olympia to give our kids better opportunities to succeed. I’ll prioritize an economy that works
for all of us, funding local schools, raising the minimum
wage, enacting paid sick leave, and ensuring women
earn equal pay for equal work.
For More Information:
(253) 286-9387
Info@VoteJamieSmith.com
VoteJamieSmith.com
Melanie Stambaugh
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Melanie Stambaugh is our State Representative
in the 25th District serving as Assistant Ranking Member on the House
Education Committee, Member on
the House Higher Education, Trans-
 portation, and Rules Committees.
Other Professional Experience: Melanie co-owns two
small businesses: You Impression, a personal development company and Upright Posts, a real estate sign
service.
Education: BA in Business Administration, University of
Washington Foster School of Business; Emerald Ridge
High School.
Community Service: Communities In Schools of Puyallup’s Board of Directors and Programs Committee Chair;
March Gladness Community Service Program; Daffodil
Scholarship Foundation Board; Lifetime Member of the
VFW Auxiliary; 2009 Daffodil Festival Queen.
Statement: Melanie Stambaugh is an energetic and effective leader. Born and raised in Puyallup, Melanie has
a history of supporting our schools and helping students
succeed. Melanie’s priorities are based on the needs of
our community: funding education fi rst, reducing costs
of higher education, protecting senior citizens, increasing women's health and safety, providing resources for
homeless youth, and relieving highway congestion.
Melanie’s focus is people, not politics. She brings
people together to fi nd solutions and get things done.
Melanie was named Legislator of the Year by the Washington Student Association and has been endorsed by
the League of Education Voters.
For More Information:
(253) 256-1953
Melanie@MelanieStambaugh.com
www.MelanieStambaugh.com
end of office
25th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 1
9 2 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Michelle Chatterton
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: First time candidate; not a career politician.
Other Professional Experience:
Michelle works as an Emergency
Management Program Coordinator.
In the event of a natural disaster or a terrorist attack, she
would play an integral role in our region’s emergency
response plan.
Education: Puyallup High School, Class of 2007. B.A.,
Western Washington University. Master of Public Administration, Seattle University.
Community Service: City of Puyallup’s Parks, Recreation
and Senior Advisory Board, a position confi rmed by the
City Council and involved with the operations of senior
programs at the Puyallup Activity Center. Past leader in
a local 4-H chapter and after-school tutor.
Statement: As an emergency management coordinator, I help communities plan ahead, families feel ready,
and kids feel safe. My career has taught me how to work
together to solve big, tough problems on a rapid basis.
I’ll bring a fresh, focused perspective to the challenges
Washington faces.
We’re never going to fully-fund our local schools if we
keep sending career politicians back to Olympia. We
need new legislators who are willing to break from the
mistakes of the past and make the tough choices on
education funding, traffi c congestion, and college affordability. I'd be honored to earn your vote.
For More Information:
(253) 693-8219
michelle@michellechatterton.org
www.michellechatterton.org
Joyce McDonald
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Pierce County
Council Member, served as Chair,
Vice-Chair, Executive Pro Tem;
Washington State House of Representatives; Ranking Member,
House Capital Budget Committee;
Legislator of the Year, Washington State Council Police
& Sheriffs; Business Examiner, Woman of Infl uence.
Other Professional Experience: Small Business Owner;
President, Pierce County Economic Development Corporation; Chair, South Sound 911, Flood Control District,
Crystal Judson Family Justice Center, WA State Sex
Offender Policy Board.
Education: BA, Northwest University, Magna cum
Laude; Sigma Chi Pi Honor Society; Distinguished
Alumni Pierce College.
Community Service: Youth Sports Coach; PTA President; Drug Counseling Volunteer; Youth Center President; Foster Parent and Parent Aid.
Statement: Joyce gets the job done! Twice named “Legislator of the Year” by Washington’s Police Offi cers for
providing increased school safety, tighter sex offender
laws, and tougher drunk driving penalties, Joyce also
passed the fi rst bill in the nation prohibiting text messaging while driving. Named a Woman of Infl uence by
the Business Examiner, Joyce plans to focus on SR167
and I-5 to ensure these critical transportation projects
are completed on time and within budget.
Joyce McDonald is a powerful advocate for our communities! Together we can make Washington State a better
place to live, work. and raise our families.
For More Information:
(253) 770-8061
Joyce@JoyceMcDonald.com
www.JoyceMcDonald.com
end of office
25th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 2
9 3 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
continued
26th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 1
Bill Scheidler
(Prefers Republican Party)
________________________________
Elected Experience: No information
submitted
Other Professional Experience:
Activist and writer for www.CorruptWash.com. Working 12/24/7 to
reclaim our rights that have been given away by corrupt lawyers and taken away by corrupt judges.Interim
Enviornmental Laboratory Director and on-site contract
manager for The Bionetics Corporation/EPA at Manchester, WA; Supervisory Chemist, GS 12, Department of
the Army, Tooele, UT. Managed 35-person staffs, from
technician to PhD Chemists, and $1M+ budgets in stateof-the art laboratory testing/analysis.
Education: B.S. Chemistry. DeSales University. 1979.
Community Service: Citizen member of South Kitsap
School District Budge Committee. Circa year 2000.
Statement: Washington State government is dishonest;
and it is costing taxpayer’s billions of dollars every year.
Every day our elected offi cials turn a blind eye to this
corruption, they betray our trust!
At the core of our corrupt government are lawyers. As
a fi rst priority I will insure citizens regulate lawyers and
judges – ending their gravy train at citizens’ expense.
Lawyers are supposed to cleanup corruption, not cause
it, hide it, or profi t from it! For 17 years I have worked
12/24/7, without pay, holidays off, or vacations, fi ghting
corruption in government; see www.corruptwash.com.
For More Information:
(360) 769-8531
billscheidler@outlook.com
www.corruptwash.com
Alec Matias
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: Delegate, Sen.
Sanders
Other Professional Experience:
Owner, local software company
building life-saving applications for
animal welfare organizations, including our own Kitsap
Humane Society. Two decades of software engineering
experience leading teams at Zillow, the NFL, and NBC
Universal, where I was a member of the Emmy Awardwinning team behind Jimmy Fallon’s digital experience.
Education: Student of Political Science and Digital Media, Valencia College, Orlando, FL. Elected President of
Student Government Association.
Community Service: Congressional District Leader for
Humane Society of the United States, state volunteer
with WolfPAC (fi ghting to overturn Citizens United)
Statement: I am running to represent and fi ght for
families like my own. My father, a union trucker, had his
salary reduced and pension halved before he was let go
due to injury. Medical bills depleted my parents' savings, forced them into bankruptcy, and now they must
sell their home of nearly 30 years to make ends meet.
As your State Representative, I will stand up to the big
money interests attacking working Washingtonians. Our
campaign does not accept corporate contributions because I represent your interests, not the establishment’s.
Our campaign is your campaign, your fi ght is our fi ght.
For More Information:
(360) 329-2082
alec@alecmatias.com
www.AlecMatias.com
9 4 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
26th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 1
Jesse L. Young
(Prefers Republican Party)
________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative, 2014 - Present.
Other Professional Experience: As
a software engineer and business
owner, Jesse has advised companies nationally and internationally in the industries of
fi nance, healthcare, aerospace, and technology. These
include, Russell Investments, Boeing, Swedish Medical
Center, Premera Blue Cross, Kaiser Permanente, and
Peoplesoft.
Education: Woodrow Wilson HS, Valedictorian and
Washington State Scholar; University of Notre Dame,
BBA MIS.
Community Service: Jesse kept his promise, and successfully lead the effort to stop toll increases. He is
a Prison Ministries volunteer, WCCW, Navy League
member, and volunteer / fi nancial-supporter of YWAM’s
Adoption Ministry through which he and his wife adopted a child from Ethiopia.
Statement: Having grown up on the streets of Tacoma
and experiencing homelessness as a youth, I learned to
take nothing for granted. Despite a rough start to life, I
was blessed to have the opportunity to apply hard work
and street smarts to become Valedictorian of my class
and then graduate from Notre Dame.
As your State Representative, I care about making sure
those opportunities exist for everyone. Whether I’m
standing against ineffective government and regulations, working to strengthen our schools, or applying my
career experience to help get this economy going, I’ll
continue working hard to serve you. Vote Young!
For More Information:
(253) 509-8585
info@jyfsr.com
www.VoteJesseYoung.com
Larry Seaquist
(Prefers Indep't Democrat Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: As a legislator,
Larry delivered strong, independent
leadership. Working with Republicans and Democrats as Chair of the
House Higher Education Committee, he cancelled dozens of moneywasting laws and replaced an old agency with a new,
streamlined group dedicated to student success with
lower tuition. A budget hawk, he helped control bridge
tolls and modernize our ferry system.
Other Professional Experience: A 32-year Navy vet,
former Captain of Battleship IOWA, Larry helps veterans
continue to succeed.
Education: BS, OSU; Federal Executive Fellow.
Community Service: Larry supports YMCA and student
groups. He bikes the Tour de Pierce and Seattle-to-Portland rides.
Statement: An experienced, take-charge executive, Larry
is used to getting things done right and fi nished on time.
Disappointed that our do-nothing Legislature has failed
our students, teachers, and families, Larry traveled the
state building a practical work plan to push our schools
back on track. His "Apple Action Agenda" maps a bipartisan path to a fully funded, fully functional system of
local public schools.
Called the "hardest working person in the Legislature,"
Larry says, "Stop the political wars. We have big problems to solve. Let's build our state's future in a new,
can-do climate of cooperation."
For More Information:
(253) 225-0616
larry@larryseaquist.com
www.larryseaquist.com
end of office
9 5 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Michelle Caldier
(Prefers Republican Party)
________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative: January 2015 - present.
Michelle was recognized for her
Bi-Partisanship and work to prevent
Tacoma Narrows Bridge tolls from
increasing.
Other Professional Experience: Michelle taught as an Affi liate Professor at the University of Washington for over
a decade. She is a dentist who devoted her practice to
caring for the nursing home population.
Education: Central Kitsap High School. AAS, Olympic
College. BS & DDS, University of Washington
Community Service: Michelle donated over $1,000,000
of dental care at the Key Free Clinic and to vulnerable seniors and children. She is a foster mother and chaired
the Access to Care Committee.
Statement: Throughout my life, I have overcome many
challenges. I was in foster care as a child and on my
own at 17, supporting myself with three minimum wage
jobs. I became a single mother at a young age and
worked hard to earn my doctorate.
I understand the challenges we face in our state and
believe in working across the aisle to get real solutions
instead of political ones, like stopping Tacoma Narrows Bridge tolls from increasing and reducing college
tuition. I am a fourth generation Kitsap County resident
and proud to serve my hometown as State Representative.
For More Information:
(206) 898-3883
michelle@michellecaldier.com
www.michellecaldier.com
Randy Spitzer
(Prefers Independent Dem. Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: With time in
the private and public sector, this
is my fi rst time running for elected
offi ce.
Other Professional Experience:
Founder and business advisor for 21 years, Spitzer Consulting Group; Washington State Public School Teacher
for 9 years; International Business Consultant, Lebow
Company; Certifi ed Financial Planner.
Education: Bachelor’s in Education; Pacifi c Lutheran
University.
Community Service: Vice President, Washington Music
Educators Association, Board member of Gig Harbor
Chamber of Commerce; Bremerton Chamber of Commerce; Rotary Club of Gig Harbor; President of East
Bremerton Kiwanis; Artistic Director and Executive
Director of non-profi t Cora Voce; Council President of
Agnus Dei Lutheran Church.
Statement: Many families, including my own, struggled
during the recession. We’re back on our feet now, but
others are still struggling. Seniors and the middle class
pay more in taxes than Seattle billionaires. Meanwhile,
legislators like my opponent are being fi ned $100,000 a
day for failing to fund education. Worse yet, my opponent is using campaign contributions from special
interests to defend a defamation lawsuit. We need new
leadership.
As a small business owner, teacher, and Certifi ed Financial Planner, I’ll bring tax fairness to Olympia and stand
up for our kids. I’m Randy Spitzer; I ask for your vote.
For More Information:
(360) 871-7251
Randy@ElectSpitzer.com
www.ElectSpitzer.com
end of office
26th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 2
9 6 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Greg Taylor
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: No Information
Submitted
Other Professional Experience: IT
Consultant and Small Business
Owner
Education: Lincoln H.S., Henry Foss H.S., Tacoma Community College, Pierce College
Community Service: 10 Years Leader and Volunteer with
Pierce County 4-H, Supporter of the Tacoma Rescue Mission and Seattle Bread of Life Mission. Member of the
Small Business Community.
Statement: Greg Taylor is all about Tacoma. Living his
entire life in Tacoma, he knows all too well the challenges and struggles that families face every day. He is an
advocate for the neighborhoods he grew up in, and for
small business. Greg is active in the local music scene,
as well as a long-time leader and volunteer in Pierce
County 4-H. His passion has always been to help others
however he can.
Greg believes that the best way to uplift all of the residents of Tacoma is by providing real solutions, not quick
fi xes, that will put everyone on the road to long lasting
prosperity and liberty. He also wants to be your champion for liberty by openly defending your rights that are
guaranteed to you by the State and Federal Constitutions.
He decided to run for Senate because he believes that
some of the current representatives in our district are
not doing their job and do not have the best interests
of our communities in mind. As your representative in
Olympia, Greg Taylor will ignore special interests and
instead keep his promise to put his neighbors fi rst when
it comes to issues of the State.
For More Information:
(253) 306-2383
info@gregtaylorforsenator.com
www.gregtaylorforsenator.com
Jeannie Darneille
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Senator,
2013-present; State Representative,
2001-2012
Other Professional Experience:
Director or Program Offi cer: Pierce
County AIDS Foundation; YWCA; WA ECEAP; Point
Defi ance Zoo and Aquarium; Emergency Food Network;
Nonprofi t consultant (clients included Tacoma Community House, United Cerebral Palsy, Hospitality House,
and the Korean Women’s Association); service on
boards and commissions, including the WA State Historical Society and the Western State Hospital oversight
commission.
Education: B.A., Western Washington University; M.Ed.,
Colorado State University
Community Service: Boards: Tacoma Community
House, Breast Cancer Resource Center, City Club, Associated Ministries, American Leadership Forum. Volunteer: Hospitality Kitchen, Mason Middle School Boosters, Stadium Boosters, Women of Vision
Statement: I have always tackled tough challenges. I
am the oldest of six children raised in a military family by parents with strong values and a commitment to
community. I directed nonprofi ts, including the Pierce
County AIDS Foundation, the Emergency Food Network,
and the Korean Women’s Association, and raised funds
to start Zoolights in 1988. I have represented the 27th
District since 2001 as State Representative and now as
State Senator.
I worked in the community mobilization to stop the
methanol plant in Tacoma. I am a champion for children
and families, people with mental health challenges or
addiction, and youth and adults in the justice system. I
am committed to improving our education and health
care systems. I have worked to secure funding for local
infrastructure, including transportation projects, museums, colleges and universities, and health care facilities
to improve Tacoma.
I stand up for persons who are less fortunate and work
to reduce poverty. I strive to end racial disproportionality and reform the criminal justice system. I am committed to improving education for all learners. I am prochoice, and will always work to end all discrimination. I
am a champion for Tacoma.
I ask again for your vote.
For More Information:
(253) 219-1345
Vote4Jeannie@aol.com
www.Darneille4Senate.com
27th Legislative District, State Senator continued
9 7 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Martin Cline
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Nonprofi t Leadership, Post graduate leadership
Other Professional Experience:
Healthcare Employee, Medical Center chaplain, United Army Reservist
Offi cer, Army chaplain, Social Work, Family Advocasy,
Para Education, Early Childhood Education-Headstart/
ECEAP, Emergency Service Response, Crisis Counseling
Education: MA-DIV Multnomah Graduate School/Seminary, BA-SOC Washington State University, CPT-United
States Army Chaplain School, Certifi cate WA SateDepartment of Children and Family Services (DCFS),
Certifi cate TPCC-Tacoma Police and Fire Chaplain
Community Service: Greif/Loss Support services, Veteran Outreach/Support, Foster Child & Adoption Awareness, At risk Youth, Domestic Violence prevention,
Suicide Prevention, Senior Services
Statement: Tacoma is an “amazing” city, its strength
lies with its people. Together with your support and
vote, I look forward becoming your next #27 District
Senator this November. Our city needs a leader to represent, promote and protect Tacoma’s best interests in
State Legislature. Unlike other candidates, I was born
and raised in Tacoma, third generation Washingtonian.
Given this local perspective and personal commitment,
I’m better able to advocate for the needs and concerns
of Tacoma's residents in Olympia. My leadership goals
are rooted in being strong proponent for business development, entrepreneurship, employment/wage sustainability. Lets continue to maintian support for local
police, fi re and 1st responders, this issue is close to my
heart.
As we move forward together as a community, it’s
important to remember our commitment to uplift our
young people, seniors, disabled and communities of
color. Tacoma has a long history of diversity of thought,
culture, lifestyle and civil rights. This has resulted in an
ever growing and important Artist and creative community here.
Tacoma needs to maintain that sense of livability and
affordability for all its communities to continue to be
successful, moving forward. I thank you for your support
and ask for your vote.
For More Information:
(253) 219-1315
SenatorClineforTacoma.WA.27thDist@gmx.us
Vote4Cline.com
Spilled coffee on your ballot?
Threw it out with the recycling?
Never received it?
If you need a replacement, contact
Pierce County Elections. You can call,
email, or visit our website to request
another ballot.
Requests for replacement ballots
are processed daily.
Don’t wait until the last minute!
Pierce County Elections
(253) 798-VOTE (8683) or (800) 446-4979
pcelections@co.pierce.wa.us
PierceCountyElections.org
Lost or damaged
ballot?
end of office
27th Legislative District, State Senator
9 8 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
27th Legislative District,
State Representative, Position No. 1
Laurie Jinkins
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative; Appropriations, Health
Care & Wellness, and Judiciary
(Chair) Committee
Other Professional Experience:
Director of Organizational Initiatives, Tacoma-Pierce
County Health Department; former Assistant Secretary,
Washington Department of Health; former Assistant Attorney General
Education: JD, Seattle University Law School; MA, Business/Health Care Administration and BA, Management/
Marketing, University of Wisconsin
Community Service: Greater Tacoma Community Foundation Board; Fair Housing Washington Board; Former
Tacoma Community College Trustee; Tacoma Community House Board; American Leadership Forum Board;
YWCA Board; Puget Sound Business Examiner 2007
Woman of Infl uence; Governor's Award for Leadership
in Management. Laurie lives in Tacoma with her wife,
Laura Wulf, and their son.
Statement: Representing you, I have worked every
day to make progress on our shared values. Our kids
deserve to have education fully funded. It's the key to
Washington's economic future. Mental illness isn't a
character fl aw, it's a treatable illness. Everyone should
pay their fair share of taxes. Transgender people should
not be discriminated against. Your race and zip code
should not govern your access to justice or how healthy
you will be. Affordable housing stabilizes lives and communities. I will continue to work hard on these issues
and many others. Thank you for returning me to a job I
love.
For More Information:
(253) 219-1345
info@lauriejinkins.com
lauriejinkins.com
27th Legislative District,
State Representative, Position No. 2
Jake Fey
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative 2013-Present; Tacoma
City Councilmember 2006-2012
Other Professional Experience:
Director, Washington State University Energy Program; Former Energy Services Manager,
Tacoma Power
Education: B.A. Political Science, University of Washington; Masters in Public Administration, University of
Puget Sound
Community Service: Board Member, Puget Sound
Regional Council Economic Development District and
Transportation Policy Board; Board Member, Pierce
Transit and Sound Transit; Vice-Chair, Puget Sound
Clean Air Agency; Chair, Tacoma Public Utility Board;
Board Member, Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department; Board Member, Boys and Girls Club of South
Puget Sound; Board President, Tacoma-Pierce County
Big Brothers/Big Sisters; Rotary 8.
Statement: Every day Jake puts his heart and energy
into advocating for and representing the vital needs of
our communities--good paying jobs, quality schools
that are fully funded, a transportation system that works
for everyone, and an effective safety net for the most
vulnerable.
As Vice-Chair of the House Transportation Committee,
Jake led the way to secure funding for needed local
transportation projects including I-5 JBLM, Highway 167,
Port of Tacoma Road, Pierce Transit and Sound Transit.
Jake is endorsed by Tacoma Firefi ghters, Washington
Education Association, Washington Conservation Voters, Washington State Labor Council and many other
organizations.
For More Information:
(253) 383-5908
jakefey@rainierconnect.com
jakefey.com
27th Legislative District,
State Representative, Position No. 2
9 9 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
United States Senator
U.S. Senators must be at least 30 years of age, have been a citizen of the U.S. for nine years, and be a registered
voter of the state from which he or she is elected. The Senate is made up of 100 members, two from each state,
and each Senator’s term is six years.
Governor
The Governor is the chief executive offi cer of the state. The Governor makes appointments for hundreds of positions, including directors of state agencies. The Governor reports annually to the Legislature on affairs of the state
and submits a budget recommendation. The Governor may veto (reject) legislation passed by the Legislature.
Lieutenant Governor
The Lieutenant Governor is elected independently of the Governor. The Lieutenant Governor acts as Governor if
the Governor is unable to perform the offi cial duties of the offi ce and is fi rst in line of succession if the Offi ce of
the Governor becomes vacant. The Lieutenant Governor is the presiding offi cer of the state Senate and serves in a
variety of boards and committees.
Secretary of State
The Secretary of State is the state’s chief elections offi cer, chief corporation offi cer, and oversees the state Archives and Library. Primary functions include certifying election results, fi ling and verifying initiatives and referenda, publishing the state voters’ pamphlet, registering and licensing corporations, limited partnerships and
trademarks, registering charitable organizations, and collecting and preserving historical records of the state. The
Secretary of State is second in line of succession for the Offi ce of the Governor.
State Treasurer
As the state’s fi scal offi cer, the state Treasurer’s principal duties are to manage and disperse all funds and accounts, be responsible for the safekeeping and interest on all state investments, account for and make payments
of interest and principal on all state bonded indebtedness, and maintain a statewide revenue collection system for
the purpose of expediting the deposit of state funds into the Treasury.
State Auditor
Working with more than 2,600 state and local governments, the state Auditor conducts independent fi nancial,
accountability, and performance audits of all Washington state governments. The state Auditor conducts investigations of state employee whistleblower assertions about state agencies and also investigates reports of fraud,
waste, and abuse received through its citizen hotline.
Attorney General
The Attorney General serves as legal counsel to the Governor, members of the Legislature, state offi cials, and
more than 230 state agencies, boards and commissions, colleges and universities. The offi ce also represents the
various administrative agencies and schools in court or administrative hearings. The Offi ce of the Attorney General enforces consumer protection statutes and serves the public directly by providing information on consumer
rights and fraudulent business practices.
Superintendent of Public Instruction
The Superintendent of Public Instruction is the only state executive offi ce elected as a nonpartisan position.
As head of the state educational agency and chief executive offi cer of the state Board of Education, the Superintendent is responsible for the administration of the state kindergarten through twelfth grade education program.
The regulatory duties of the offi ce include certifi cation of teaching personnel, approval and accreditation of programs, and apportionment of state and local funds.
Commissioner of Public Lands
The Commissioner of Public Lands is the head of the Department of Natural Resources, overseeing the management of 5 million acres of forest, agricultural, range, tidal, and shore lands of the state.
Insurance Commissioner
The Offi ce of the Insurance Commissioner regulates insurance companies doing business in Washington, licenses
agents and brokers, reviews policies and rates, examines the operations and fi nances of insurers, and handles
inquiries and complaints from the public.
Descriptions of Offices in the Primary
100 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
28th Legislative District, State Senator
Marisa Peloquin
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: After years of
serving in the US Army and as a
local PTA offi cer, Marisa is making
her fi rst run for public offi ce.
Other Professional Experience: As
a Colonel in the United States Army Reserve, Marisa has
held many leadership positions, including brigade, battalion and company command. Marisa has also worked
as Senior Marketing Manager at VeriSign.
Education: Master of Business Administration, Saint
Martin’s University; Bachelor of Arts, Seattle University;
Curtis High School
Community Service: Former Region 10 Director, Washington State PTA; Vice-President, University Place PTSA
Council; President, Sunset PTA; Fort Lewis Friends of the
Museum, American Association of University Women
Statement: Partisan gridlock and wealthy special interests continue to block progress in our state. It’s time for
a change. We need independent leaders with integrity
and determination to focus on our priorities and get
Olympia back on track.
That’s why Colonel Marisa Peloquin (USAR) is running
for State Senate. Marisa is a military leader and business professional, who has risen through the ranks over
the last 28 years. She got to where she is today because
of hard work, dedication and a proven track record of results. When Marisa hears a good idea, it doesn’t matter
who it comes from. She’ll work across party lines – and
won’t take no for an answer – to get positive results for
us.
Marisa’s top priority is ensuring effective, transparent,
and accountable state government that gives all of us
– not just wealthy special interests – a strong voice in
Olympia. She will stand up for veterans, middle class
families, and seniors by re-investing in our schools, leveling the playing fi eld for small businesses, improving
public safety, and ensuring our tax dollars are invested
wisely in our community.
Marisa is the proven leader we can trust to get Olympia
back on track.
For More Information:
(206) 434-0793
info@marisaforsenate.org
www.marisaforsenate.org
Steve O'Ban
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Senator. Chair, Human Services, Mental
Health and Housing. Vice Chair,
Law and Justice. Chairs the Children’s Legislative Oversight Committee. Serves on Veterans’ and
Military Affairs Committee, and newly-formed Select
Committee on Quality Improvement of State Hospitals.
Former State Representative, Assistant Floor Leader.
Other Professional Experience: Steve helps small businesses and nonprofi ts. He defended 8,000 Washington
educators in the U.S. Supreme Court when money was
taken illegally from their paychecks and used for politics.
Education: University of Washington, Seattle University
Law School.
Community Service: Leads a ministry providing refurbished housing, meals, and tutoring for children on the
Yakama Indian Reservation. Wife, Laurie, taught at TCC.
Statement:“I grew up delivering newspapers here,
raised by a single mom who taught kindergarten. I
coached my sons’ baseball teams. One son attended
West Point and both serve proudly at JBLM. This is
home. I want to make a difference.”
In his fi rst term, Steve is fi xing broken government. He
investigated the early release of 3,000 prisoners that
resulted in two deaths. He won funding to fi x I-5 congestion at JBLM…helping to keep the base off the closure
list, protecting jobs. He supported education funding
(additional $4.5 billion, a 30-year high) and the biggest
college tuition cut ever - without raising taxes!
Steve created a training program to fi ght human traffi cking, empowered parents to get their children mental
health care denied by bureaucrats, holds government
accountable when it fails vulnerable children, and gave
orphaned foster kids a legal voice to fi nd loving homes.
Steve makes vets a priority. He authored a tax credit for
employers who hire vets, and a program giving college credit for military training. He advocates for better
breast cancer screening and authored a law to reduce
pregnancy-related deaths. Senator O’Ban works across
party lines for results that improve our lives. Vote
Steve O’Ban.
For More Information:
(253) 312-1688
Steve@SteveOBan.com
www.SteveOBan.com
end of office
101 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
28th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 1
Mari Leavitt
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: UP Metropolitan Parks District Commissioner.
Former Chair, Pierce County Ethics
Commission (appointed).
Other Professional Experience:
Deputy Director of Pierce County's human service department, administering 200 staff and providing services
to thousands of Pierce County families, seniors, veterans, and kids; Past Director of Student Support Services
at Pierce College; owns business with husband.
Education: PhD, Oregon State; M.Ed and BA, Western
Washington.
Community Service: President, University Place Schools
PTSA; Board Member, YMCA; Trustee, Accountable
Community of Health; Mari is active in our schools and
her church. Mother of seven, including two adopted
through foster care. Mari believes children deserve secure, loving homes.
Statement: Mari Leavitt is a respected County and 22-
year college administrator, small business owner, PTSA
leader, and proud military mom, daughter and granddaughter. She will be a principled, independent State
Representative focused on real priorities: funding local
schools, transportation solutions, community safety and
crime prevention, and investing in local workers and
jobs.
With our vote, Mari will fi ght to protect and expand
veteran career training and health benefi ts - including
mental health coverage. She will keep taxes low for
families and small businesses, and demand on-time,
balanced budgets. Mari Leavitt will work for us, not a
political party agenda.
For More Information:
(253) 651-5583
ElectMariLeavitt@gmail.com
www.MariLeavitt.com
Richard (Dick) Muri
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative, 28th District; Former
Pierce County Councilmember,
District 6; Former Board Member,
Steilacoom Historical School District, Number 1
Other Professional Experience: USAF Retired Lieutenant Colonel; Chief of Quality Management, 62nd Air Lift
Wing 1992-97; Director of Airlift Operations, Incirlik Air
Base, Turkey 1989-91 (Operations Desert Shield, Desert
Storm, and Provide Comfort)
Education: Masters of Public Administration, Golden
Gate University; Bachelor of Science in Environmental
Health, University of Massachusetts-Amherst
Community Service: Charter Member, Kiwanis Club of
Steilacoom; Former Board Member, Steilacoom Historical Museum Association; Breakfast Team Leader, St.
John Bosco; Youth sports coach (wrestling, track, soccer)
Statement: Dick Muri is a proven leader in our local
government, a retired Air Force Lieutenant Colonel,
and our state representative. Dick was a member of the
Steilacoom School Board and the Pierce County Council. While on the County Council, Dick Muri balanced
nine county budgets, trimming wasteful spending and
guaranteeing vital services were funded without raising
taxes.
Dick Muri knows that only people create jobs, not big
government. He supports job growth by making it
easier for businesses to prosper. Dick Muri has a 19 year
proven record of commonsense conservatism, environmental stewardship, and fi scal responsibility.
For More Information:
(253) 581-5609
Dick@DickMuri.com
DickMuri.com
continued
102 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
28th Legislative District
State Representative, Position No. 1
Position No. 1
Anne Setsuko Giroux
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: No information
submitted
Other Professional Experience:
Anne Setsuko Giroux is 46 years
old, born in Japan and has lived in
Pierce County Washington for 44 years. She has been
a homeowner in District 28 for 24 years and has three
children ages 24, 19, 16, and a 7 year old cat
Education: Giroux received a Nursing Assistant Certifi -
cate from Bates Technical College in 1992 and a Medical
Offi ce Clerk Certifi cate from Tacoma Community College
in 2008. She worked at St. Joseph Hospital, MultiCare,
and H Mart.
Community Service: Giroux was an Ambassador for
Seattle Human Rights Campaign, Pierce County Aids
Foundation, and volunteered at Tacoma Rescue Mission.
Statement: I am not a career politician but a true candidate for the people, and truly an outsider. I have
fi rsthand knowledge of many of the diffi culties facing
families who are struggling with so many institutional
and personal problems. I am willing to listen, can truly
relate, and have the courage to protect individual rightsas government is required to do. I have the ability to
face complex issues and fi nd workable solutions. I intend to convert my diffi cult experiences into the strength
and resolve necessary to promote a positive plan- that
works best for the protection of individual rights.
For More Information:
(253) 442-7232
annegiroux.2013@gmail.com
www.annesetsukogiroux.wordpress.com
end of office
103 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
28th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 2
Christine Kilduff
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative; Former two-term President
and Vice-President, University Place
School Board.
Other Professional Experience:
Eighteen-year Assistant Attorney General leading a
statewide team to protect local communities from drunk
drivers. Litigated hundreds of cases involving families,
workers, and neighborhoods affected by crime. Oversaw
a 150-person agency charged with making sure children
and parents received child support they were due.
Education: Law Degree, Boston College; BA, summa
cum laude, Phi Beta Kappa Honors, Boston College.
Community Service: Married mother of two and 18-year
resident of University Place; PTA leader; Citizens for University Place Schools; Lawyers Helping Hungry Children;
various volunteer legal clinics.
Statement: It is an honor to serve as your Representative and independent voice. As a longtime prosecutor,
school board leader and PTA mom, my top priority is
fi ghting for local families – partnering with Republicans
and Democrats to decrease class sizes, increase mental health services, and eliminate unfair corporate tax
loopholes instead of raising taxes on families and small
business.
I've led bipartisan efforts to stop the state from releasing
offenders in Pierce County, protect veterans’ benefi ts,
lower college tuition, and ensure women earn equal pay
for equal work. I ask for your vote to continue making
real progress for our community.
For More Information:
(253) 448-9641
Christine@ChristineKilduff.com
www.christinekilduff.com
Paul Wagemann
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Pierce County
Charter Review Commissioner,
Clover Park School Board Director,
Precinct Committee Offi cer.
Other Professional Experience:
Decorated Marine Corps fi ghter pilot with Navy, Air
Force, Marines, and NASA commendations. Entrepreneur and business owner. Advanced to lead larger
companies and staff in retail, management, grocery,
construction and fi nance.
Education: University of Washington Bachelor of Science - Aeronautics and Astronautics, Air Force Test Pilot
School, Naval Aviation Safety Offi cer School, Command
and Staff College.
Community Service: Lakewood Planning Commissioner,
Lakewood YMCA Advisory Council, neighborhood watch
leader, business/ethics mentor. Married to Linda 43
Years. Son Scott (Laser Physicist) wife Shannon. Son
Jay (Air Force Pilot) wife Kirstin. Four grandchildren.
Statement: Like many of you... I don't exactly fi t the
stereotypical political box. I'm for common sense leadership with the compassion to care for our veterans and
seniors, and the character to ensure the safety and success of our children.
We need policies that actually enhance business and
employment growth, with more effi cient, balanced government budgets, while also caring for our most vulnerable neighbors. We need common sense values that
honor and equip those who educate, serve, and protect
our community and country, and break the roadblocks
that slow success, working to build a brighter future for
all of us together.
For More Information:
(253) 209-5638
paulwagemann@gmail.com
www.paulwagemann.org
continued
104 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
28th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 2
Michael Winkler
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Served eight
years on the Board of Directors for
the Steilacoom Historical School
District, including three years as its
chairman.
Other Professional Experience: Retired U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel; Taught elementary education for nine
years for the Clover Park School District; Adjunct Professor for Saint Martin’s University.
Education: Master’s in Teaching, Saint Martin’s University; Bachelor of Science, North Dakota State University;
Associate of Science, Troy State University.
Community Service: Past president of the SHS Booster
Club; Co-Executive Chair of a successful Steilacoom
school bond and three levies; Co-Chair of the successful
DuPont EMS Levy; past youth group leader
Statement: Mike Winkler is a veteran, teacher, and
leader in our community. He’s had two careers, fi rst as
Lt. Colonel in the Army and as a 5th grade teacher. This
makes him the perfect fi t for our community, combining
our area’s commitment to veterans and our commitment to schools.
Mike has three goals as our Representative: ensure
our local schools are fairly funded, improve services to
veterans, and repair our regional transportation system.
Goals that (again) refl ect the real needs of our area. Mike
and his wife of 29 years, Nanette, have two college age
children, Joshua and Michaella.
For More Information:
(253) 459-4756
mike@electmikewinkler.org
electmikewinkler.org
Brandon Lyons
(Prefers Libertarian Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: None.
Other Professional Experience:
Founder & CEO of Dadmom Technologies, Inc.; Founder of the
Liberal Rifl e Association; union
pipefi tter at Infrasource; former chair secretary at Seattle
Single Parent Advocacy, Counseling & Enrichment.
Education: Proudly educated in the Bethel School District, 3rd grade to graduation.
Community Service: I've always been one to set new
trends. On three recent birthdays, I've held food drives,
which were highly successful. Giving, instead of getting.
Imagine the impact we could all make by incorporating
charity into our day to day lives.
Statement: My passion and focus is supporting Washington families. We can help families and children
through job growth, a stronger more effective education
system, and family court reform. I want to leave a better
environment for our children to grow up in.
I will fi ght for all of your constitutional rights, for every
amendment, for every person. I respect every principle
in the Bill of Rights as it was originally intended. I believe in leading toward solutions, not dictating agendas.
As your state representative, I will make decisions based
on empirical data, logic, reason and most importantly
your voice.
For More Information:
(253) 365-7440
BL@BrandonLyons.org
www.BrandonLyons.org
end of office
105 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
29th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 1
Branden Durst
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative (ID) 2006-2010; State
Senator (ID), 2012-2013
Other Professional Experience:
Washington small business owner;
Complaint mediator, Washington State Attorney General's Offi ce (Tacoma); Member (former), WFSE/AFSCME
Council 28A. Awards: U.S. Department of Defense (for
passing pro-military family/veterans legislation); Education Association A+ Friend of Education; Accomplished
40 Under 40; Friend of Freedom Public Policy Innovation
Education: BA, Political Science, Pacifi c Lutheran University; MPA, Public Policy & Administration, Boise State
University; IAFF-WSCFF Fire Ops 101 Training Graduate
Community Service: Committed husband and father;
Member; Calvary Baptist Church, Tacoma; Previous volunteer experience: LateNight Program Lakewood YMCA;
Young Life; homeless ministry downtown Tacoma
Statement: Independent Leadership is needed in Olympia. I have a record of getting results by working collaboratively across the aisle. I've written laws to help
seniors, students, veterans and military families and
fought for blue collar families like yours and mine. While
the Democratic incumbent has a long list of endorsements from political insiders and Party Bosses and is
fi nanced by payday lenders, debt collectors, and forprofi t education lobbyists, my campaign is supported
by people like us including Democrats, Republicans and
Independents.
If you're ready for a change from politics as usual, I'd be
honored to earn your vote.
For More Information:
(253) 642-7340
info@votedurst.com
votedurst.com
David Sawyer
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative (2013-Present)
Other Professional Experience:
David works as a law clerk / paralegal and is studying to become an
attorney. He works at Sadler Ladenburg in downtown
Tacoma.
Education: Central Washington University, Bachelor of
Arts in Political Science and Bachelor of Arts in Geography and Land Studies; Washington State Bar Association (APR 6) Law Clerk Program (In Progress) - this is an
apprenticeship model rather than law school.
Community Service: David served as a Big Brother for
Big Brothers Big Sisters. David served on the board of
Project U (a United Way sponsored program designed to
increase volunteerism).
Statement: David is running for re-election. He fi ghts to
fund our schools, protect the vulnerable, and make sure
we have an economy that works for all and not just the
wealthy few.
He passed a fi rst-in-the-nation law that established the
“Child Rescue Fund” that funds law enforcement investigations of child abusers, a law that punishes felons
who are using our civil legal system from behind bars to
harass their victims, and a law that sets up a process to
expunge records of those who were wrongfully convicted. David is a leader who is getting results.
For More Information:
(253) 778-6080
info@electdavidsawyer.com
www.electdavidsawyer.com
continued
106 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
29th Legislative District,
State Representative, Position No. 1
Position No. 1
Rick Thomas
(Prefers Independent Rep
Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience: Rick
is a retired Army Colonel who
 commanded the 1st Special Forces
Group at JBLM during OEF and OIF; served at embassies in Asia and the Middle East and Operations Director
for Israeli-Palestinian Cooperation in the West Bank. Currently works as a consultant and Volunteer Director of a
scholarship fund.
Education: BA, Economics, University of Massachusetts;
MA, Asian Studies, Naval Postgraduate School; National
Security Fellow, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University
Community Service: Established the 1st Special Forces
Group Scholarship Fund; Volunteer, Fort Lewis and St.
Frances Cabrini parishes; Member, Tacoma-Pierce County Chamber of Commerce and the VFW.
Statement: Our 29th District continues to be a low priority for the current legislature and change is needed if we
want to see our district begin to improve. I believe that
people always come before party politics and, as such,
I will be your independent voice for progress - I'll work
with anyone in order to help our local businesses create
jobs, to make real improvement in our schools, to begin
reducing our traffi c congestion and to properly care for
our veterans here in the 29th District.
For More Information:
(253) 220-5590
Rick@VoteRickThomas.org
www.VoteRickThomas.org
end of office
107 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
29th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 2
Jessica Garcia
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: No information
submitted
Other Professional Experience: No
information submitted
Education: Graduate of Franklin Pierce H.S.-Tacoma,WA;
Studied Early Childhood Education at Pierce CollegeSteilacoom/Puyallup, WA branches
Community Service: S.A.C Board Member at Destiny
Charter M.S.-Tacoma,WA ; Parent school volunteer currently/former PTA member (Norfolk,VA; Des Moines,WA
and Tacoma,WA): 2000-present ; Board Member of
PNWHS ; Marine spouse volunteer-Camp Pendelton,CA ;
Served as a U.S. Naval Sea Cadet
Statement: We need a realistic voice in Olympia. A voice
to shine a light on the disconnect between what is perceived and what is the reality for our undervalued 29th
District. I will work across the aisle to provide school
choice for families, mental health support, encourage
fi scal responsibility, and be supportive of legislation that
supports our distrct, not hinders its' growth. Partisan
politics has not worked-it's time for a change. I am that
realistic voice of change,dedicated to bringing value
back to the 29th District.
For More Information:
(253) 289-2970
votejessicagarcia2016@gmail.com
www.votejessicagarcia.com
Steve Kirby
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative – 16 years, Tacoma City
Councilman – 15 years
Other Professional Experience:
Former member; Workforce Development Council Executive Board, Tacoma-Pierce
County Board of Health, Tacoma Joint Municipal Action
Committee, Pierce Transit Board, and the Tacoma City
Council Public Safety Committee. Current chairman the
House Business and Financial Services Committee.
Education: Mount Tahoma - Class of 1970, Bates Technical College, Tacoma Community College, Honorary
Associate of Applied Technology - Clover Park Technical
College
Community Service: Steve Kirby is a life-long resident
of the district he represents. Over the years, he has been
a member of numerous community organizations that
benefi t the people of the 29th district.
Statement: Representative Steve Kirby takes his job
title seriously; he represents his constituents. Steve
Kirby has what it takes to stand up to special interests
and speak out for the hard working people of our community. He always has. He always will.
Anyone can make excuses. Steve Kirby makes a difference. He fi ghts for good schools, safe neighborhoods,
a strong economy, and he always puts people ahead of
partisan politics. He believes legislators are elected to do
the work of the people - not the political parties. Reelect
Steve Kirby. It’s the next-best thing to being there yourself
For More Information:
(253) 473-3663
stevekirby@harbornet.com
www.stevekirby.org
end of office
108 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Linda Kochmar
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: 30th District
State Representative, Pos. 1, 2012-
2016, Federal Way City Council,
1997-2011, Deputy Mayor (2000-
2001 & 2004-2005), Mayor of Federal Way 2010. Elected Chair of
Suburban Cities Public Issues Committee. Elected to
Federal Way Community Council in 1980.
Other Professional Experience: Certifi ed Risk Manager
(ARM), Program Administrator, Association of Washington Cities Certifi ed Municipal Leader, National League of
Cities Certifi cate of Achievement in Leadership.
Education: B.A. Degree, Marylhurst University, 1966;
Coursework toward Masters in Public Administration,
Seattle University.
Community Service: Kiwanis/Foundation Board, Soroptimists, AAUW, St. Vincent's Parents Club & Council,
Communities in Schools' Advisory Board, MSC Board.
Statement: Serving Federal Way and the 30th District for
18 years, I’ve seen incredible change as our population
increased and diversifi ed. As your State Representative
for 4 years, I helped secure $10 million in capital improvements and over $180 million in transportation improvements. I’ve advocated for fi scal responsibility and
will continue to do so. I need your continued support to
tackle the tough issues facing our district today – such
as reducing traffi c congestion, improving the state of
our schools, and continuing to attract living wage jobs
for our hard working families. I ask for your vote again
this November.
For More Information:
(253) 640-0469
Linda@LindaKochmar.com
www.LindaKochmar.com
Mike Pellicciotti
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Not a career
politician
Other Professional Experience: A
former Deputy King County Prosecuting Attorney, Mike’s fought
violent crime in our community. He cracked down on
sex traffi cking and domestic violence in Federal Way. As
a state fraud prosecutor, Mike’s managed efforts against
corporate healthcare fraud -- fi ghting government waste,
protecting seniors, and returning $30 million to taxpayers
Education: Law Degree - Gonzaga; Master's (Fulbright
Scholar, studying economic development); Bachelor's
(Business Administration)
Community Service: The son of educators; Mike serves
with the Federal Way Human Services Commission,
and chaired the Equal Justice Coalition, advocating for
homeowners unlawfully foreclosed upon, veterans denied benefi ts, and victims of predatory lending
Statement: We can’t keep electing the same politicians
and expect improved results on public safety, government waste, and education. It’s time for a change. As
a prosecutor and anti-fraud investigator, I've protected
the public and returned millions to taxpayers. Throughout my career, I've given voice to the voiceless. As your
Representative, I’ll fi ght for government accountability,
take on corporate abuse, enact criminal justice reforms,
and improve our schools and roads. Like you, I am
frustrated by political gridlock. I will be your advocate in
Olympia.
Endorsed by community leaders, Nurses, Attorney General Bob Ferguson, Sheriff John Urquhart, State Labor
Council
For More Information:
(253) 237-2838
Mike@electmikep.com
www.electmikep.com
30th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 1
end of office
109 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
30th Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 2
Kristine Reeves
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: First time candidate; not a politician.
Other Professional Experience:
Kristine currently serves as the
Director of Economic Development for the Military and Defense sector for Washington
State. Former Regional Outreach Director, US Senator
Patty Murray; former Program Coordinator, Spokane
Community College.
Education: Political Science B.A. Washington State University; Masters, Gonzaga University.
Community Service: Volunteer, Urban League Young
Professionals; Board President, Regional Task Force
on Human Relations; Truman National Security Project; President, Eta Mu Zeta Graduate Chapter, Zeta Phi
Beta Sorority of professional women; March of Dimes;
YWCA; American Cancer Society.
Statement: A tireless advocate for job creation and veterans’ services, Kristine Reeves has devoted her life to
ensuring Washingtonians, especially veterans and their
families, have the opportunity to thrive in our state’s
economy.
An economic development specialist who’s worked for
US Senator Patty Murray and the State Department of
Commerce, Kristine is ready to bring those skills to the
legislature to ensure a family-friendly economy, strong
local public schools, reduced crime rates, and comprehensive transportation solutions. Kristine lives with her
husband, Camron, and their two young children in Federal Way. Endorsed: Senator Patty Murray, Congressman Adam Smith and more.
For More Information:
(206) 249-3327
Info@ElectKristineReeves.com
www.electkristinereeves.com
Teri Hickel
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative, 1 year (2015 – present)
Other Professional Experience:
Advancing Leadership, Executive
Director, 15 years; Federal Way
Chamber of Commerce, 12 years, Interim CEO, 1.5 years;
Education Foundation, Executive Director, 4 years.
Education: Washington State University, Bachelor of
Science
Community Service: My longtime commitment includes:
Citizens for Federal Way Schools (20 years), Federal Way
Community Gardens Foundation (8 years), Todd Beamer
High School Leadership Team (6 years), and PTA (10
years). Awards include: Federal Way Key to the City, Soroptimist Woman of Distinction, FWPS Volunteer of Year
(6 times), Seahawk Community Quarterback, Golden
Acorn, and Nomination for Citizen of the Year.
Statement: As your state representative, I have prioritized four important areas: fully funding basic education;
creating and sustaining jobs; transportation and reduced
congestion; and public safety. I care deeply about our
richly diverse community where over 100 languages are
spoken in schools. I will continue to work with everyone
in our community and across party lines to fi nd the best
solutions. My campaign team consists of Republicans,
Democrats, and Independents, because they know I care
deeply about the issues and solving problems. I am honored to serve you in Olympia, and I would appreciate
your vote and support.
For More Information:
(253) 261-4643
Teri.H@comcast.net
terihickel.com
end of office
110 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
31st Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 1
Drew Stokesbary
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Washington
State Representative, 31st District
(member of House Appropriations,
Finance, and Judiciary Committees)
Other Professional Experience:
Managing Attorney at Stokesbary PLLC (advising small
companies on business law and tax issues); former
Policy Aide with the King County Council
Education: J.D. cum laude, University of Notre Dame
Law School; B.S. in Economics, Duke University
Community Service: Member of Auburn Valley YMCA
Board of Directors, Offi ce of Civil Legal Aid Oversight
Committee, Financial Education Public-Private Partnership, and Washington State Bar Association Taxation
Section; United Way VITA volunteer tax preparer; provider of pro bono legal counsel to local nonprofi ts
Statement: I'm running for reelection to keep the state's
focus on issues that matter most to our community:
education, jobs, and economic growth.
I will fi ght to fund schools fi rst. As a father of two young
boys, I know kids deserve our fi rst dollar, not our last
dime. I'm honored that League of Education Voters and
Stand for Children have endorsed me. Our local businesses deserve an advocate in Olympia so they can
focus on creating jobs and growing the economy here at
home. They shouldn't require a lawyer like me to navigate state bureaucracy and an outdated tax code.
For More Information:
(253) 501-1756
drew@drewstokesbary.com
www.drewstokesbary.com
John Frostad
(Prefers Libertarian Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience:
Self-employed acupuncturist and
small business owner for 20 years.
Adjunct faculty at Bastyr University.
Executive director, Acupuncture Association of Washington. Past-President, Washington East Asian Medicine
Association.
Education: Master of Science / Bachelor of Science,
Bastyr University, 1997. Associate of Arts in Business
Management, Green River Community College, 1994.
Community Service: I have spent 20 years caring for the
health of my community. I have been active politically
to ensure that Washington healthcare consumers have
access to a diversity of care and fair treatment by their
insurance companies.
Statement: State government has grown rapidly under
the watch of both major parties, yet we’re not adequately funding education or infrastructure. We need to do
like anyone in a fi nancial bind, redefi ne the word ‘need’
and only pay for what we must. We don’t need more
taxation; we need better priorities.
Addiction won’t be beat by branding people criminals.
Poverty won’t be solved by making more people dependent on the state. We need criminal justice reform,
programs that encourage self-reliance, adequate mental
health services, and functional basic education. Everyone in Washington deserves dignity and stewardship
over their own lives.
For More Information:
(253) 310-3941
johnfrostad@outlook.com
www.johnfrostad.com
end of office
111 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
31st Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 2
Lane Walthers
(Prefers Independent Dem. Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: First time candidate; not a politician.
Other Professional Experience:
Committed to public service, Lane
has been a fi refi ghter/EMT for 39
years. He has worked to provide fi re suppression, emergency care and rescue, hazardous materials response,
and has led public education programs.
Education: Green River and Bellevue College; Fire Science and Prevention classes.
Community Service: Lane served on committees to support and restructure fi re services and presents public
seminars on CPR & fi rst aid training. Past volunteer for
pancake feed events to provide food and clothing for the
Sumner and Bonney Lake communities and has collected donations for the Muscular Dystrophy Association.
Statement: Lane has lived in the 31st district for more
than 50 years with his wife Rhonda, a para-educator
who works with special needs children. He's a no-nonsense professional fi refi ghter/EMT who will keep our
comunities safe, a fi scal conservative who will demand
accountability with our tax dollars.
Lane is a seasoned, calm, Independent voice who will
bridge the differences between Republicans and Democrats to solve problems. He will prioritize balanced
budgets, invest in schools, keep violent offenders behind
bars, take care of veterans, and support local businesses
that create jobs. An Independent voice for the 31st District!
For More Information:
(253) 350-0103
ElectLaneWalthers@gmail.com
www.LaneWalthers.com
Pablo Monroy
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Republican
Precinct Committee Offi cer, 2012.
Other Professional Experience: Sergeant, Washington National Guard;
Cofounder & Co-owner, Odd Otter
Brewing Company; U.S. Navy Petty Offi cer 2nd Class;
Beverage Sales, Pepsi Bottling Group, member of Teamsters 313.
Education: Graduate of Pasco High School, Pasco, WA;
Highline Community College, 2010-2011; University of
Washington Tacoma, 2012-2013.
Community Service: Commissioner, Bonney Lake Park
Commission; Board member, Pierce County Veterans
Advisory Council; Board member, Servicemembers
United; Leader, United Through Reading, which connects deployed service members with their families.
Statement: Pablo Monroy believes we need a fi scally
conservative state government that uses our taxes
wisely, and does not increase taxes or create a new state
income tax.
Parents must have as many educational options and
resources as possible for their children. This means fully
funding public schools, and keeping charter schools
open. Meanwhile, Traffi c Avenue has become a punchline in Sumner. Washington already has the budget to
fi x the problem, it just needs to be prioritized. Additionally, government restrictions on small business have
limited business owners' ability to create jobs. The
legislature must encourage new entrepreneurs, not stifl e
them.
For More Information:
(253) 263-2876
Pablo@electPabloMonroy.org
www.electPabloMonroy.org
continued
112 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
31st Legislative District, State Representative, Position No. 2
Phil Fortunato
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: 47th District
State Representative 1999-2000.
Served on the Agriculture & Ecology, Local Government & Transportation Committees
Other Professional Experience: Environmental Training
and consulting, International Trade in Europe & Asia,
Small contracting business, Founding director & fi rst
president of the PNW Erosion Control Assoc.
Education: College Of Agriculture, Rutgers University,
New Brunswick N.J, Landscape Architecture
Community Service: Phil is married for 39 years with
5 children, 3 of which are decorated US Marines with
1 still serving, 4th Degree KofC, Supports community
issues Sweats for Vets, Coats for Kids, Relay for Life,
Special Olympics, Project Rachel
Statement: As a small businessman for over 40 years, I
understand the importance of good fi scal management.
I am an experienced negotiator both in business and
politics and will hit the ground running.
I support Parents Rights, signifi cant property tax reductions for retired seniors so they are not taxed out of their
homes, protections for elderly citizens & people with
disabilities, our Veterans, especially those disabled during military service, term limits, no more tax increases
and a constitutional amendment for the 2/3 vote to raise
taxes and force fi scal management to our state government. Endorsed by Senator Pam Roach
For More Information:
(253) 680-9545
Phil@VoteFortunato.org
www.VoteFortunato.org
Morgan Irwin
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Morgan Irwin
has served on the Enumclaw City
Council since 2014. He serves on
the Public Safety Committee, the
Public Works Committee, is currently the Chair of the Finance Committee and a board member of the Transportation Benefi t
District.
Other Professional Experience: Northwest Farm Credit
Services-Capital Markets Division; The Foundation
Group- Commercial Broker; Columbia Bank- Commercial Loan Offi cer; Seattle Police Department- Patrol
Offi cer
Education: Bachelor’s of Science in Agricultural Business from Washington State University
Community Service: Farm Bureau, FFA Alumni Association, Cascade Foothills Soccer Coach. Married 10 years
with 3 children under the age of 6.
Statement: Children deserve an education that will
prepare them for the future. Families deserve a transportation system that allows them more time with their
families and less time in their cars. Small businesses deserve the ability to move goods across the state and hire
hard-working Washingtonians. Finally, our fi rst responders deserve the tools necessary to keep our communities and neighborhoods safe.
As a police offi cer and city councilman, I have fought
for my community. As your Representative I will fi ght
for you in Olympia. I promise to work tirelessly on your
behalf and I humbly ask for your vote.
For More Information:
(509) 339-3363
Morgan@morganforwashington.com
morganforwashington.com
end of office
113 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Precinct Committee Officer Duties
The role of the Precinct Committee Offi cer is to
represent the precinct in political party activities,
and to represent the party.
Each offi cer is a member of the County Central
Committee. The committee has the authority to
nominate persons or fi ll vacancies for a state,
legislative or county offi ce. Also, they may elect
members to the State Central Committee.
Who is Eligible?
Anyone who is a registered voter and a member of a major
political party may become a candidate. A candidate must fi le an online Declaration of Candidacy form. Since voters do not register by political party in Washington, a candidate declares
himself/herself to be a member of a political party at the time of fi ling.
Election of a PCO
Precinct Committee Offi cers will be elected at the August 2nd Primary Election.
Only contested PCO races appear on the ballot. If two or more candidates fi led for the same
offi ce in the same party, they will appear on the Primary ballot.
If there isn't a Democratic or Republican Precinct Committee Offi cer position on your ballot,
then only one or no candidate fi led for the offi ce.
Term of Office and Vacancies
The term of offi ce is two years. Should a vacancy occur in the offi ce (caused by death, disqualifi cation, resignation, or failure to elect), the chairperson of the County Central Committee fi lls
the vacancy by appointment.
Precinct Committee Officers
114 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Pierce County Executive
Rick Talbert
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Current Pierce
County Councilmember in his second term. Previously served eight
years on the Tacoma City Council.
Other Professional Experience:
Past President, Small Business Incubator. Seven years
as a Pierce County Performance Auditor responsible
for reforming county government. Chair, Pierce Transit
Board. Tacoma-Pierce County Board of Health Member.
Education: Western Washington University, B.A. Proud
Lincoln High School Graduate.
Community Service: Co-Founder and Board Chair for the
Crystal Judson Family Justice Center, serving domestic
violence victims and their children. Member of South
Sound Behavioral Health Coalition. Past Communities in
Schools Board Member. Past Chair of Eastside Neighborhood Council.
Statement: As Pierce County Executive, I will invest my
time and energy on job creation, transportation, and
public safety. I'm ready to solve the big challenges facing Pierce County.
We must reinvest in our roads, transit, and parks for future generations. We must make Pierce County a clean,
safe, and healthy place for all families to work, live and
play. I have 27 years of experience delivering results and
making county government more transparent and effective. That’s a record I will build on as your Pierce County
Executive.
Pierce County has a homelessness crisis. Disabled
veterans and children should never be forced to live out
of cars or on the street. I have a plan to adequately fund
our mental healthcare system and provide the substance
abuse treatment options our county needs.
Olympia and Washington, D.C. are broken. Now more
than ever we need a Pierce County Executive who will
focus on getting the job done, no matter which political
party they are working with. I’ve served as a counterbalance to the extreme views on the County Council, and
I’d do the same as County Executive. I’ll bring people
together to solve our problems and get things done.
For More Information:
(253) 314-3514
rick@ricktalbert.com
www.ricktalbert.com
Larry Faulk
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Washington
State Senator (26th District); Pierce
County Freeholder (responsible for
drafting Pierce County Charter)
Other Professional Experience:
Board of Directors, Sunvault Energy (International Renewable Energy/Solar Power Company); Retired Executive, The Boeing Company; CEO, Washington State
Environmental Hearings Offi ce; Chairman, Washington
State Pollution Control and Shoreline Hearings Boards;
Deputy Director, Martin Luther King Association (housing/support services for homeless)
Education: Master's of Public Administration; Bachelor
of Arts Political Science; Graduate, Senior Executive
Program, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
University
Community Service: Loaned Executive, Asian Pacifi c
Economic Conference; Trustee, Tacoma Community College; Pierce County Library Foundation Board; Loaned
Executive United Way; Volunteer Tutor, Washington
Elementary
Statement: The job of the Executive is to solve problems, challenge the status quo, provide the leadership
to make change happen, and to do so in a transparent
way while being accessible to you. I will do this by being
available monthly in selected libraries to discuss your
concerns, holding weekly press conferences, and ensuring that all meetings of my administration are open to
the public.
We need to provide family wage jobs in Pierce County
because we have had the highest unemployment rate
of the three urban counties for the last nine years. I will
work on developing a high technology manufacturing
company to provide these jobs. It will be owned by the
people and based on the Green Bay Packers NFL football
team model.
We need to solve the traffi c congestion problems on I-5
and in other areas of Pierce County by making better
land use decisions, developing enhanced ride sharing
options, and improving bus and light rail services. I will
provide the political leadership to make these changes
happen.
As your Executive, and the only candidate not part of
the current political establishment, I will fi ght for Pierce
County to solve these major public policy problems.
For More Information:
(253) 380-3462
larryfaulk2016@gmail.com
www.larryfaulk.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
115 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Pierce County Executive
Bruce Dammeier
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: State Senator
(2013 – Present); State Representative (2009 – 2013); Puyallup School
Board (2001 – 2009).
Other Professional Experience: Eight years of military
service and six years as an executive in a local manufacturing company. Current co-owner with Print NW, a
small business in Pierce County.
Education: Curtis High School -1979. United States Naval Academy (BS, Engineering, with distinction). University of Washington (MS, Engineering).
Community Service: Served in leadership with Goodwill,
Good Samaritan Hospital, UW-Tacoma, and Young Life.
Attend Lighthouse Christian Church. Former reading tutor and coach. Married for 32 years with three sons and
a daughter-in-law.
Statement: At the Naval Academy and in the military,
I learned that leadership, integrity, and service matter.
Unfortunately, too many politicians have not learned
these same lessons. Here in Pierce County, many politicians count voting “no” as victory or attending more
government meetings as success. Our county government needs new leadership that will deliver results for
our citizens, not excuses. That’s why I am running for
Pierce County Executive.
We need a proven leader who will move us in the right
direction. As a small business owner, I have created
hundreds of local jobs. As a legislator, I took on our
county’s toughest challenges. To reduce traffi c congestion and stimulate economic growth, I passed legislation
to widen I-5 through JBLM and fi nally connect highway
167 to the Port of Tacoma—all while preventing an
increase in tolls on the Narrows Bridge. To save bluecollar jobs, I fought for investments in new timber technologies. To prevent unnecessary tax increases, I voted
six times to implement the voter-approved 2/3 requirement to raise taxes.
As your county executive, I will listen and get things
done. Pierce County is a great place, but with your support, we can make it better.
For More Information:
(253) 268-9081
bruce@brucedammeier.com
www.brucedammeier.com
Dan Roach
(Prefers Republican Party)
_________________________________
Elected Experience: Pierce County
Council (2011 - current). Pierce
County Council Chair (2014 - 2015).
Washington State Representative
(2001 - 2010).
Other Professional Experience: Owner, Roach Gymnastics, Inc. (1999 - 2016).
Education: Brigham Young University, B.A.
Community Service: Current and Past service: Rotary,
Lions, Autism Speaks, Beautify Bonney Lake board
member, Boy Scouts of America - Scout Master, Church
- several volunteer positions.
Statement: Our constitutional rights, the will of the
people, and common sense are my guiding principles.
No one will be a stronger advocate for taxpayers. I
sponsored the charter amendment that voters supported
with 67% of the vote that made it harder to raise taxes in
Pierce County.
When our fellow citizen was sued by the Executive, and
the people’s right to referendum was under attack, I
lead the effort to shut that down. As Council Chair, I led
the effort to hire fi ve new deputies to combat property
crimes, and this year I sponsored legislation to clean up
homeless camps. Public Safety is my top priority. Our
families and businesses must feel safe.
We are blessed with a strong military presence in Pierce
County and I am proud to have sponsored the “Rest in
Peace Act” that protects military families from funeral
protestors.
I look forward to applying my experience as a business
owner and elected offi cial to work for you as your next
County Executive, where I can have an immediate impact on public safety, property rights, job creation, open
and accountable government, infrastructure and other
important issues. I would appreciate your vote. Thank
you! www.vote4danroach.com
For More Information:
(253) 347-6701
dan.roach@comcast.net
www.vote4danroach.com
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
116 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Pierce County Council, District No. 2
Carolyn Edmonds
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: Washington
State House of Representatives;
King County Councilmember;
your elected representative on
the 2016 Pierce County Charter
Review Commission.
Other Professional Experience: Windermere Real
Estate Broker; Guardian ad litem for vulnerable adults;
Consultant on micro-business development to combat
poverty; Assistant Director of a volunteer-based statewide program of advocacy for the elderly and disabled
living in long-term care settings.
Education: Masters, Public Administration, University
of Washington; Bachelor of Science, Business Administration, San Jose State University.
Community Service: Co-Chair, Northeast Tacoma
Neighborhood Council; Board Member, Save Northeast Tacoma; Chair, 27th LD Democrats; Board Member, Pierce County Conservation Voters.
Statement: The most experienced, the most qualifi ed.
A former State Representative and Councilmember,
Carolyn balanced budgets, cut waste and stood up for
working families. She passed some of Washington’s
toughest protections for family caregivers, and fought
for the interests of small towns and suburban communities. Carolyn is a fi erce advocate for her constituents.
Fighting for ethical leadership. Carolyn is against the
practice of politicians “double dipping.” Her Republican opponent was once known for supporting open
government and cutting waste. Now, her opponent
claims she can hold two offi ces, costing taxpayers
nearly $200,000 per year. She won’t have time to
represent two offi ces, but will happily pocket our tax
dollars.
Carolyn Edmonds understands this community. As a
realtor, Carolyn has been an active member of Pierce
County’s small business community. Representing
you on the Charter Review Commission, she fi ghts for
our district’s priorities.
Carolyn Edmonds has the right temperament. We deserve a leader with a reputation for working together
to get things done. Carolyn is endorsed by Democrats,
Republicans, and Independents. That’s because they
know Carolyn will be the most effective advocate for
our community. For hard work and straight talk, vote
Carolyn Edmonds for Pierce County Council!
For More Information:
(253) 617-7061
info@carolynedmonds.com
www.carolynedmonds.com
Pat Jenkins
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: Puyallup
School Board, 2011-2015
Other Professional Experience:
Community journalist. Editor of The
Dispatch, a community newspaper
serving south Pierce County. Editor of Senior Scene, a
monthly magazine for Pierce County seniors, and Where
To Turn, Pierce County’s annual senior services directory.
Education: Puyallup public schools: Karshner, Fruitland,
Aylen, and Rogers; Green River Community College
Community Service: Former PTA president. Active supporter of Alzheimer’s Association’s Alzheimer’s Walk
and Cancer Society’s Relay for Life. Past board member
for local nonprofi t organizations, including a food bank,
park district, state corrections facility, county elections
department, community services agency, a service club,
and a chemical dependency treatment center.
Statement: I’m a native, longtime Pierce County resident ready to serve you on the Pierce County Council.
I’ve spent most of my career as a community journalist, reporting on local events, people, government, and
politics.
I’m a political outsider, raised in Puyallup by blue-collar
parents who believed strongly in public service. I’ve
lived their values as a community journalist, an advocate for seniors through a social services agency, a
school board member, and as a volunteer in schools,
youth activities, and community organizations.
I will bring a fresh, objective eye and commonsense approach to solving the problems Pierce County faces. We
need to hold government accountable for the tax dollars
it spends and support initiatives that ensure all citizens
are safe in their homes and on the roads. I will take a
leadership role on the growing challenge of homelessness and related mental health services issues.
We need to be part of a regional effort to relieve traffi c
congestion. Well-planned public transit is a cost-effective solution. We must also promote sensible commercial growth and job creation with businesses that have
a demonstrated record of respecting the environment,
local communities, family-wage jobs and benefi ts, and
affordable housing.
For More Information:
(253) 770-0902
pat@electpatjenkins.com
www.electpatjenkins.com
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
117 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Pam Roach
(Prefers Republican Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: Washington
State Senate representing Pierce
County; Senate Law and Justice
Committee, Chair; Senate Government Operations Committee, Chair
(local government); Senate Presi-
 dent Pro Tem (elected by peers).
Other Professional Experience: Chief of staff to King
County Councilmember Kent Pullen, 14 years; Co-chair
of the Joint Committee on Veterans and the National
Guard; Senate Ways and Means Committee; presided
over election law reform and open government laws.
Education: Brigham Young University, B. A. (History),
teacher certifi ed.
Community Service: Auburn Foodbank, board member;
Auburn Youth Resources, board member; Asian Pacifi c
Cultural Center, advisory board; Founder: School of
Hope, Honduras; Save Lake Tapps, founding member.
Statement: Public safety is our fi rst priority. As State
Senator I get results. Homelessness, property and drug
crimes, and mental health issues threaten our families and businesses. Working with others I will provide
needed law enforcement and mental health services. I
am proud to be endorsed by emergency responders.
Creating family wage jobs is important. I am leading the
effort to keep our ports competitive despite the massive
foreign efforts which now threaten our jobs and Washington's economy. (Please see pamroach.com for KING5
coverage.) I am endorsed by both labor and maritime
industry leaders for my bi-partisan approach to jobs.
Property taxes are too high, driving seniors from their
homes and keeping young families from home ownership. I sponsored the 2/3 majority to raise taxes in the
legislature. We need to prioritize spending.
Partial list of endorsements: current Councilmember
Joyce McDonald; Auburn Mayor Nancy Backus; Jerry
Korum, Puyallup Mayor John Knutson (ret.); Longshoreman, (IBEW); Operating Engineers; Pierce County
Deputy Sheriffs Independant Guild; both Central, and
East, Pierce Fire and Rescue; SEIU 1199, (Nurses); and
am supported by the Puyallup and Muckleshoot tribes.
Thank you. I would appreciate your vote.
For More Information:
(206) 743-1029
Vote4pamroach@comcast.net
pamroach.com
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
Pierce County Council, District No. 2
118 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Pierce County Council, District No. 3
Jim McCune
(Prefers Republican Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: State Representative, 2005-2012; Pierce
County Councilman, 2013- Present;
Chair, Performance Audit Committee; Past Chair, Public Safety Committee; Community Development
Committee; Economic and Infrastructure Committee,
Zoo and Trek Authority Committee, Nisqually Land Trust
Board.
Other Professional Experience: Small business owner,
45 years; Seafood distributor and marketer.
Education: Highline HS; private courses in constitutional
law and early American History.
Community Service: Hatchery corporation board member (10 years); Guardian of SmallBusiness Award (NFIB);
Cornerstone Award (AWB); “Friend of Farmers” (WA
Farm Bureau); Member, Graham Business Assoc.; Back
Country Horseman; active church member; former
Assistant Scout Master, high school basketball coach,
adoptive and foster parent
Statement: Councilman McCune fi ghts job-killing taxes
and a nightmare of regulations. He also opposed the
largest spending increase in Pierce County history. Jim
believes core services can be funded with existing revenues and live within our means.
Jim leads the fi ght for more deputies on the street,
advocates to end human traffi cking, keeping heroin and
meth out of neighborhoods, opposes normalizing a drug
culture and against early release of drug dealers and
violent felons.
McCune advocates principles-over-politics and works to
reduce fi nancial burdens on individuals and businesses
as they strive to bounce back during these tough economic times. He’s always seeking ways to reform land
use laws and return authority back to individuals. Jim
passed an ordinance to stop the unconstitutional government spying program on citizen’s properties.
Jim works for increased recreational opportunities,
veteran’s discounts in our parks, expanding our trail
systems, reducing youth violence and promotes family
activities, such as 4-H programs. He stopped chemical
killing fi sh farms off Pierce County’s coastal waters to
keep our environment clean and also worked to have
old culverts changed out for safe fi sh passages to their
spawning habitat. I’m asking for your vote to continue
fi ghting for you!
For More Information:
(253) 318-4420
electmccune@gmail.com
ElectJimMcCune.com
Dennis Townsend
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: Bethel School
Board, 1991-2006, chair four times.
Burns, OR School Board, 2009-
2011, chair.
Other Professional Experience:
Retired after 42 years as a telecom industry technician,
supervisor and engineer. Part-time radio broadcaster
(KMO/Tacoma, KZZR/Burns, OR, KRNN/Juneau, AK).
Education: Franklin Pierce High School, graduated with
honors. Numerous technical and industry-related courses in the telecom industry. Associate member, IEEE.
Community Service: Current member, Bethel Educational Scholarship Team. Formerly: Pierce County Planning
Commission, Washington State Electrical Board, Washington State Community Economic Revitalization Board,
Mountain Highway Safety Corridor, Pierce Transit Citizens Advisory Group. Coach, Bethel Recreation Association for 20 years.
Statement: I was born and raised in Pierce County (Midland), and spent most of my years working and raising
kids here. My wife Dona and I live in Spanaway. I’ve
seen this area grow, and am concerned, like you, with
preserving our quality of life here.
Service is the key word of my life. With my experience
on the School Board, Planning Commission, and many
other community projects, I’m ready to serve you on the
County Council. I've worked as a telephone technician in
South Pierce County for most of my career, and I know
it’s layout and history.
The Council position is a no-nonsense job and should
stick with the basics. Our Sheriff took cuts during the
recession that should be restored. Motorists still crowd
onto “farm-to-market” roads, even after thousands of
homes have been built. Blight, graffi ti and litter contribute to degraded neighborhoods, and we must fi ght it.
Kids face hazards walking to school without sidewalks.
Homelessness and opiate dependence are threatening
families. I will address these issues aggressively and
thoughtfully, making sure your tax dollars are used effi ciently - on the basics - instead of ideological pursuits.
Thank you for your vote. Let’s get to work!
For More Information:
(253) 651-3558
dennis@dennistownsend.org
www.dennistownsend.org
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
end of office
119 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Connie Ladenburg
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: Connie is fi nishing her fi rst term on the County
Council, served 8 years on the Tacoma City Council and one term as
29th District State Representative.
Other Professional Experience: Connie worked for Safe
Streets Campaign as a Youth Programs Manager and for
Faith Homes as a case manager for pregnant or parenting homeless girls.
Education: Bachelors of Arts from PLU and Masters in
Social Work from UW.
Community Service: Founder and Board Chair of Community in Schools; Advisory Board Member for Community Youth Services; Board Member, Broadway
Center for the Performing Arts. Married to John, has fi ve
children and eleven grandchildren.
Statement: Vote for Connie Ladenburg. She listens to
her residents, responds to their needs and gets results.
A brief summary of why you should vote for Connie:
Connie received Council support and funding for an
analysis of the Mental Health system to determine gaps
in services; established a pre-trial services program
in Superior Court; continued funding for our successful drug court and family court; established a property
crimes unit; established a Superior Court Mental Health
Court; and supported services in District Court for mental health offenders. She supported the facilitation and
implementation of US Open, a national golf tournament
that resulted in over $130 million dollars in economic
benefi t to our region; worked on securing an inter-local
agreement with Pierce County, University Place, and
Lakewood to develop a plan for a trail system through
Chambers Creek canyon; worked with Governor Gregoire to secure funding for Chambers Bay’s north dock
pier extension and fl oating moorage project - restoring
shoreline and constructing a new dock; worked on a
plan to reduce pollutant run-off water into our streams,
rivers, and bays; and started sidewalk installation and
other pedestrian improvements in school zones.
We need Connie to continue to work for us!
For More Information:
(253) 208-6522
connie@ladenburg.org
Video
Voters'
Guide
Pierce County Council, District No. 4
Sign the voter declaration on the back
of your return envelope before sending it back. Take your time and sign
with your everyday signature.
Before any ballot can be counted,
state law requires that we make sure
the signature on the ballot envelope
matches the signature on fi le in your
voter registration record.
If you forget to sign, or if the signature doesn’t match, elections staff will
contact you so that your ballot can be
counted.
David Clarke
(253) 555-1960
Your signature
matters
7/20/16
120 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Pierce County Council, District No. 6
Kurt Erickson
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: None
Other Professional Experience:
United States Army Infantry Staff
Sergeant, Sniper Team Leader,
Combat Veteran in Afghanistan;
Military Intelligence Squad Leader, Washington Army
National Guard; Area Manager, Amazon Prime Now;
Wine Manager, Total Wine & More; Assistant Wine
Maker, Lakeridge Winery & San Sebastian Winery
Education: B.S., Purdue University, School of Agriculture
Community Service: Volunteer for Rivers of Recovery,
which serves combat veterans suffering from PTSD
by using environmental activities and conservation as
therapy. Volunteer spokesperson for Hiring Our Heroes
Foundation. Additionally, Kurt’s family maintains an
Adopt-a-Street near their home in Lakewood, where he
also serves on the Lakewood Arts Commission.
Statement: The County Council is failing our community. Our Councilmember’s refusal to fund mental health
care is putting our families, and especially veterans, at
risk. As an Afghanistan combat veteran, I understand
the needs of service members and how to make Pierce
County an attractive place for them to live.
My priority will be to balance our budget responsibly.
That means funding mental healthcare to improve quality of life and solve our chronic public safety defi cit.
We should be putting more deputies on the street and
funding our courts, not eliminating positions. The recent
increase in property crimes is largely due to the Council’s poor planning. I’ll prioritize public safety fi rst.
We need to stop wasting taxpayer money. Non-binding
advisory votes have cost $325,000 just this year. Poor
planning and budgeting at our overburdened jail cost
$4,888,000 in overtime, with nearly $3,000,000 annually
being spent housing the mentally ill in jail. It’s time we
had a fi scally responsible Councilmember. I humbly ask
for your vote.
Endorsements: Pierce County Councilmember Derek
Young, State Senator Steve Conway, State Representatives Steve Kirby and Jake Fey, University Place School
Board Director T’wina Franklin, Pierce County Central
Labor Council and local small businesses.
For More Information:
(253) 348-7274
electkurterickson@gmail.com
www.electkurterickson.com
Linda Farmer
(Prefers Democratic Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: Pierce County
Charter Review Commissioner
(2016)
Other Professional Experience:
Communications Director, Pierce
County Library System. Former: Community Relations
Offi cer, City of Tacoma; Communications and Government Affairs Manager, City of Federal Way; Communications Director, Washington State Puget Sound Action
Team; Communications Director, Association of Washington School Principals; News and Information Director, Pacifi c Lutheran University; newspaper reporter
Education: Master of Science, Communications Management, Syracuse University; Bachelor of Arts, Communications and Political Science, University of Washington
Community Service: Active volunteer with SAVE KPLU
campaign. KPLU 88.5 Community Advisory Board Member. Former Board Member: Public Relations Society of
America, City Club of Tacoma, Citizens for a Healthy Bay
Statement: I’d be honored to be your voice on the Pierce
County Council. I serve as the Communications Director for the Pierce County Library System. My role is to
help residents discover the world of information that
still exists at the library (yes, there is a world outside of
Google!).
It’s clear we need a better Pierce County Council. As a
former newspaper reporter, I understand government
shouldn’t get a free pass. This council majority has sat
on its hands for too long, waiting for our traffi c, mental
healthcare, and public safety challenges to solve themselves.
We need new leaders who will step up, bring people
together, and take action. I will. I know we can put a stop
to our homelessness and substance abuse crises, relieve
I-5 traffi c congestion, protect our water, and always remember the sacrifi ces our veterans have made.
My husband and I have called Pierce County home
for over two decades, and our daughter Dylan attends
public schools in Lakewood. I want to make this county
a better place for her to grow up in. I would be honored
to put my energy and experience to use as your voice on
the Pierce County Council.
For More Information:
(253) 533-8416
linda@lindafarmer.org
www.lindafarmer.org
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
121 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Doug Richardson
(Prefers Republican Party)
_______________________________
Elected Experience: Pierce County
Councilmember (Current), Lakewood City Council (1995-2012).
Served as the Mayor of Lakewood
for 7 years.
Other Professional Experience: Former Army Ranger;
Brigadier General, USA (Retired), 32 years active and reserve service; Over 25 years of management experience
at Northrop Grumman Corporation.
Education: B.A., The Citadel; Masters, Strategic Studies,
US Army War College
Community Service: South Sound Military and Communities Partnership, Cofounder; Rally Point 6 Veterans’ Services Organization, Charter Board Member; St
John Bosco; Former youth baseball and soccer coach;
Past Clover Park School District Bond Committee Chair;
Chamber of Commerce; Mary Bridge Festival of Trees
Sponsor; Behavioral Health Coalition, Member
Statement: On the County Council, Doug Richardson
has worked hard to achieve real results for us. With
your support, Doug will continue his efforts to make
our community a better place to live, work, and raise
a family. Throughout his tenure as the Mayor of Lakewood and now as the Chair of the County Council, Doug
has earned an excellent reputation for his willingness
to put aside partisanship and work together with others. Because of the partnership between the public and
the private sector, we now have a transportation plan
in place to deal with the traffi c bottleneck along JBLM.
We can count on Doug Richardson for continued responsible fi scal management and support for economic
development.
Public safety remains the top priority. Now, there are
more Sheriff Deputies on the streets protecting our community. Doug is working with law enforcement and the
Legislature to ensure we have the resources and training
we need to make our neighborhoods safer.
Pierce County faces many regional challenges requiring
leadership and cooperation. We need an experienced,
steady hand on the Council. Please vote to re-elect
Councilmember Doug Richardson.
 Thank you.
For More Information:
(253) 581-9475
Doug@mighty6strong.com
www.mighty6strong.com
Video
Voters'
Guide
Improperly marked ballots cost you
money.
Ballots marked incorrectly can’t be read
by the ballot tabulators. Additional
processing time is required to be able
to count your vote.
Connect the arrow using a single line.
Don’t use these marks:
Mark your ballot
correctly!
x’s
circles too light
too heavy
check marks
end of office
Pierce County Council, District No. 6
122 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
State Supreme Court Justice, Position No. 5
Barbara Madsen
_________________________________
Legal/Judicial Experience: Justice, Supreme Court (1992-present); Chief Justice, (2009-present);
Judge, Seattle Municipal Court
(1988-1992); Presiding Judge
(1990-1992); Commissioner, Seattle Municipal Court (1986-1988).
Special Prosecutor, Seattle City
Attorney (1981-1986); Attorney, Snohomish Public
Defender (1979-1981); Attorney, Associated Counsel for
the Accused (1977-1979); Intern, Spokane County Legal
Services (1975-1976); University Legal Assistance (1976-
1977).
Other Professional Experience: Production staff, Northwest Catholic Newspaper.
Education: B.A. U.W.; J.D. Gonzaga..
Community Service: Barbara and Don raised four children in Pierce County. She has volunteered with Judges
in the Classroom, U.S. Navy Sea Cadets, Tacoma Rescue
Mission, and YMCA Youth in Government.
Statement: Chief Justice Barbara Madsen has the experience, leadership, and courage necessary to protect
the liberties guaranteed all citizens. Whether it's school
funding or a neighborhood dispute, Barbara believes
everyone is equal under the law.
Balanced Experience: A 1977 Gonzaga Law School
graduate, Barbara has practiced in Eastern and Western
Washington and has served as both a defense attorney
and prosecutor. To help protect our most vulnerable,
as Special Prosecutor she developed Seattle's Family
Violence Project child abuse unit. A working mother and
proud grandmother, Barbara has a balanced, common
sense perspective on issues profoundly affecting people's lives.
Proven Leadership: After joining the Supreme Court,
Barbara helped establish the Access to Justice Board
and Commissions on Minority and Justice, Gender and
Justice, Interpreter Services, and Children in Foster
Care. Her endorsements include Democrats, Republicans, business, labor, and community groups--proof of
her commitment to individual rights and holding the
judicial system accountable to all.
Courage: We need the strong, honest, and compassionate voice of Chief Justice Madsen requiring the state
meet its paramount duty to educate our children, leading access to justice initiatives, and breaking down barriers to re-entry after incarceration. She will protect our
most precious liberties.
For More Information:
(253) 905-3272
JusticeBarbaraMadsen@gmail.com
www.ChiefJusticeMadsen.org
Greg Zempel
_________________________________
Legal/Judicial Experience: Greg
Zempel is in his sixth term as Kittitas County Prosecutor. Greg has
handled nearly every type of criminal prosecution, from shoplifting to
murder. He serves as the head of
the county's civil division, advising
the county on complex legal issues.
Other Professional Experience: Past President, Washington Association of County Offi cials.
Education: BA, University of Washington; Juris Doctor,
University of Puget Sound. Proud graduate of Roosevelt
High School in Seattle.
Community Service: Greg helped create the Sexual
Assault Interagency Coalition, and “Protecting Our
Children”, a group that educates parents on the risks
of sexual predators. He has coached youth soccer and
baseball.
Statement: Greg Zempel is a leader in law enforcement and local government – experience the people
of Washington need on our state Supreme Court. For
more than twenty years, Zempel has kept the people of
Kittitas County safe as their County Prosecutor. He has
the support of Judges, Prosecutors, state legislators and
both Democrats and Republicans to become our next
Supreme Court Justice.
We all know our state Supreme Court has become
too political. Law enforcement knows that the court is
also too unpredictable, often changing the rules that
prosecutors rely on to fairly and effectively fi ght crime.
Zempel promises a court that is “less political, more
predictable.”
The court has no one with major criminal prosecution
experience – a serious omission because criminal law
makes up a majority of the court’s cases. Adding a prosecutor to the court will make our state safer. The court
has only one member from eastern Washington, and no
one with county government experience. Electing Greg
Zempel to the court will add much needed diversity to a
court that simply doesn’t refl ect our state.
Greg and his wife Dawn have four children. The family
enjoys hiking and many other outdoor activities.
For More Information:
(509) 436-7819
Greg.Zempel@ZempelForJustice.org
www.ZempelForJustice.org
continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
Video
Voters'
Guide
123 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
(Zamboni) John Scannell
_________________________________
Legal/Judicial Experience: 1.
Filed the fi rst lawsuit by a tenant
union under state landlord tenant act.2. Blocked the building of
one stadium by challenging its
public fi nancing, and also challenged Safeco fi eld to US Supreme
court.3. Won large settlements for
demonstrators who were tear gassed and hit with rubber bullets during WTO demonstrations. 4. Represented
workers unemployment benefi ts and wage claims. 5.
Represented drivers on speeding and red light tickets.
6. Called the "bureaucrat's nightmare" by Seattle Times
for fi ling class action lawsuit on behalf of intermittent
workers, which won millions of dollars for City of Seattle
employees.
Other Professional Experience: No information submitted
Education: No information submitted
Community Service: No information submitted
Statement: I have been one of the few attorneys in the
state that has actively been supporting the American Bar
Association's criticism of the Washington attorney disciplinary system. The Washington State Supreme Court
is in charge of the system, but the court has come under
sharp criticism for 40 years for its practice of delegating
its responsibility to the Washington State Bar Association. The ABA rightly likens this to the practice of putting
the fox in charge of the henhouse, with Washington being one of the few states that continue the practice. The
practice of putting a politically elected bar leadership in
charge of attorney discipline is a direct confl ict of interest that has resulted in low charging rates, undeserved
discipline against attorneys who represent unpopular
clients, as well as increased discipline directed to minority attorneys.
I will base my campaign on the issue that I will protect
the rights of Washington citizens with decisions that are
intelligent, just and ethical.
For More Information:
(206) 223-0030
zamboni_john@hotmail.com
www.reformedwsba.com
Grant Blinn
_________________________________
Legal/Judicial Experience: Municipal Court Judge for Lakewood,
University Place, Steilacoom, and
DuPont. Judge Pro Tem for Thurston County District Court.
Other Professional Experience:
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney for
Pierce County for over 17 years; member of the Child
Abduction Response Team for the Tacoma Police Department and the Pierce County Sheriff’s Department;
elected Fire Commissioner for West Pierce Fire & Rescue; South Sound 911 Policy Board; Board of Trustees
for the Tacoma - Pierce County Bar Association; National Park Seasonal Ranger; wildland fi refi ghter.
Education: Seattle University School of Law, California
State University.
Community Service: Boys & Girls Club, Paint Tacoma
Beautiful, Habitat for Humanity, Rotary, Church.
Statement: Judge Blinn is the best choice for Superior
Court Judge because of his judicial experience, years of
service as a prosecutor, and dedication to our community. Judge Blinn is starting a veterans’ court in Lakewood. With your vote, he will work toward a countywide
veterans’ court to better serve the many former armed
services members who live in our community. In Lakewood Municipal Court, Judge Blinn has emphasized fi scal responsibility while increasing access to justice and
protecting victims’ rights.
Prior to becoming a Municipal Court Judge, Grant
worked to keep our community safe as a Fire Commissioner for West Pierce Fire and Rescue, and as a Deputy
Prosecutor for over 17 years, prosecuting Special
Assault Unit cases and homicides. In 2009, Blinn was
named Deputy Prosecuting Attorney of the Year by the
Pierce County Sheriff’s Department.
In his campaign for Superior Court Judge, Grant Blinn
is widely endorsed by law enforcement and fi refi ghters,
Republicans and Democrats, prosecutors and defense
attorneys, Pierce County judges, and leaders throughout
Pierce County.
Grant lives in University Place with his wife Katie. They
have three young children. Please cast your vote for
Grant Blinn – an outstanding choice for Superior Court
Judge. Thank you.
For More Information:
(253) 666-0685
Grant.Blinn@gmail.com
www.electGrantBlinn.org
end of office continued
Video
Voters'
Guide
State Supreme Court Justice, Position No. 5 Pierce County Superior Court, Department No. 8
124 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Pierce County Superior Court, Department No. 8
Dwayne L. Christopher
_________________________________
Legal/Judicial Experience: Over
17 years of experience; Litigates
Plaintiff’s personal injury, employment and other complex civil cases;
Worked closely with Judge Brian
Tollefson for nine years as a Judicial Assistant in Pierce County
Superior Court.
Other Professional Experience: Established Law Offi ce
of Dwayne Christopher; Mary Owen and Associates;
Cole, Wathen, Leid and Hall; Tacoma Pierce County Bar
Association Trustee.
Education: Seattle University School of Law, JD; Morehouse College, BA; Wilson High School; Baker Jr. High;
Birney Elementary
Community Service: Palmer Scholars board member;
City Club Tacoma; Werlin Reading Program; YMCA
volunteer; March for Babies; MESA Program; Tacoma
Rescue Mission; Paint Tacoma Beautiful; Serve the City.
Statement: Dwayne Christopher is a lifelong resident of
Pierce County. Dwayne has been providing service for
many years to our community through mentoring and
volunteer work. Dwayne’s values of respect, accountability and hard work come from his parents who are
retired Tacoma School District No. 10 educators.
With over 17 years of experience, Dwayne has extensive
knowledge of multiple areas of the law. As a Judicial
Assistant for nine years, he trained under one of the
most experienced judges on the bench handling a broad
range of serious cases including criminal, civil, juvenile and family law. Through diligence and dedication,
Dwayne continues to fi ght for the rights of Pierce County
citizens, including winning a disability discrimination
case in our Washington State Supreme Court.
Dwayne is the only candidate in this race that is endorsed by retiring Judge Brian Tollefson for his now
open seat. Dwayne seeks this position to serve Pierce
County as a Superior Court Judge in the same department in which he began his legal career.
You, the citizens of Pierce County, deserve to have a
judge with the most relevant experience, values integrity and will work tirelessly to keep our community safe.
Please vote for Dwayne Christopher.
For More Information:
(253) 830-5787
christopherforjudge@gmail.com
www.christopherforjudge.com
Jack Hill
_________________________________
Legal/Judicial Experience: Served
as Judge pro tem presiding over
trials and dockets in Pierce County
Superior Court (Civil, Criminal,
Mental Health, Juvenile Courts),
District Courts, and Municipal
Courts of Tacoma, Lakewood, and
Puyallup. For 26 years headed
Pierce County's second largest law offi ce - providing legal representation in the majority of cases fi led (excluding traffi c) in Pierce County Superior Court (Criminal,
Mental Health, Juvenile, Drug Courts), Disctict Courts,
and Municipal Courts of Tacoma, Fircrest, Gig Harbor,
Ruston, Federal Way and Lakewood.
Other Professional Experience: No information submitted
Education: B.S. Police Science and Administration -
WSU. Doctor of Jurisprudence - Willamette University
Community Service: 20+ years Pierce County Alliance
Board member.
Statement: How should voters decide to vote for judges?
I ask for your vote because I provide broad judicial and
legal experience relevant to the work of a Superior Court
Judge (see above). I bring a demonstrated history of
judicial, executive, and legislative trust in my legal and
judicial competence.
I have been selected by Judges, County Executives and
Council members to participate in several public safety
commissions - e.g. Domestic Violence Commission,
Pierce County Law and Justice Commission, and the Superior Court Criminal Law and Drug Court Committees. I
have been recognized by local and state bar associations
- e.g. Liberty Bell Award, Local Hero Award. In past elections/appointment processes I have been rated as 'well
qualifi ed' for the Superior Court by Wahington Women
Lawyers, the Local Bar Associations Judicial Qualifi cations Committee and the local Minority Bar Association.
My candidacy is completely free of any link or association to attorney misconduct in the Superior courts which
resulted in the reversal of several criminal convictions. It
is also entirely free from politicizing of 'judgemakers.'
I am independent, proven, and can be trusted to complement and support the Superior Court in its important
work within our county.
For More Information:
(253) 318-3336
jhhill3@comcast.net
end of office
125 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Pierce County Superior Court, Department No. 17
David Ladenburg
_________________________________
Legal/Judicial Experience: 2002 to
present - Four times elected Tacoma Municipal Court Judge. Presiding over the dedicated domestic
violence court.
Other Professional Experience:
1994 – 2002 Private practice attorney. 1991 – 1994 Prosecutor for the City of Tacoma.
Education: Law Clerk (APR 6) Internship. Passed the
Washington State Bar Exam and admitted in 1991; 1981:
Bachelor Degree, Washington State University; 1979:Associate of Arts Degree, Tacoma Community College
Community Service: Board member Center for Civic
Education. Volunteer in “We the People” and “Project
Citizen.” student civic education programs. Moot court
trial judge. Involved with Safe Streets and Tacoma’s
Neighborhood Council programs.
Statement: I’m running for Superior Court because I
have the broadest range of experience as a judge, prosecutor and private practice attorney. I have been privileged to be elected four times and serve Tacoma Municipal Court. For 13 years I worked to help those affected
by drugs, alcohol and domestic violence to make positive changes in their lives and the lives of their families.
I have the demonstrated the ability, temperament, and
knowledge to fi ll the position in Superior Court.
Lifelong resident of Tacoma and Pierce County I have
given back to the community that has given so much
to me. Was actively involved in establishing the Safe
Streets program in Tacoma’s Hilltop neighborhood and
served as the fi rst Chairman of the Central Neighborhood Council. For more than a decade I’ve worked to
educate our young citizen students on the importance of
civic involvement.
Awarded 2014 HOPE (Helping Overcome Personal Emptiness) by Pierce County treatment providers.
In voting for me the people of Pierce County are getting
one of their own community members who has worked
to make our home better for all of us. I will bring this
same commitment to the Superior Court and ask for
your vote.
For More Information:
(253) 318-6595
Ladenburgforjudge@gmail.com
www.teamladenburg.com
Karena Kirkendoll
_________________________________
Legal/Judicial Experience: Pierce
County Superior Court Commissioner, 3 years; Administrative Law
Judge, 4 years; Industrial Appeals
Judge, 4 years.
Other Professional Experience:
Over the last 25 years, Karena has
served our community as an Alternative Dispute Resolution Administrator; Past President, Pierce County Bar
Association; American Association for Justice, Member;
and as a Family Law Attorney in private practice.
Education: University of Puget Sound School of Law, JD.
University of Idaho, BS.
Community Service: Pierce County Volunteer Legal Services; Pierce County Dispute Resolution Center; Habitat
for Humanity; Team Child Pierce County; Pierce County
Citizen’s Advisory Panel; and YMCA Mock Trial Judge.
Statement: Commissioner Karena Kirkendoll is the clear
choice for Superior Court Judge. Rated “Exceptionally
Well Qualifi ed” by the Pierce County Bar Association,
the Pierce County Minority Bar Association and the
Washington Women Lawyers, Karena Kirkendoll will be
a Judge we can count on to serve with distinction.
Experience counts when electing a Judge. Karena
Kirkendoll is the only candidate in this race who has the
depth of judicial experience we need from our Superior
Court Judges. Commissioner Kirkendoll’s experience,
work ethic, and exceptional record of accomplishment
as a Superior Court judicial offi cer make her the clear
choice.
Uniquely qualifi ed to serve as a Judge, Karena Kirkendoll is endorsed by a majority of her fellow judges and
commissioners because of her integrity and unwavering
commitment to the law. Karena is widely endorsed by
attorneys, community leaders, law enforcement, and
various other organizations.
Throughout her career, Karena has worked to guarantee
access to justice for all. As a judicial offi cer for over ten
years, and as an attorney in private practice for 15 years,
Commissioner Kirkendoll exemplifi es the qualities we
deserve from our judges. Please vote for Karena Kirkendoll for Superior Court Judge. Experience really does
matter.
For More Information:
(253) 414-8568
karenaforjudge@gmail.com
www.karenaforjudge.com
continued
126 State candidates on these pages are fi led through - and approved by - The Offi ce of the Secretary of State. The County includes these pages as a courtesy to
Pierce County voters, as the State of Washington doesn’t print a primary voters’ pamphlet. Questions or concerns about these candidates call (800) 448-4881.
Tom Quinlan
_________________________________
Legal/Judicial Experience: Pro tem
Judge in Fife and Fircrest Municipal
Courts and Pierce County Superior
Court Commissioner; Superior
Court Arbitrator; US Bankruptcy
Court panel mediator.
Other Professional Experience: Extensive courtroom experience and diverse law practice
spanning three decades; Lieutenant Colonel, 18 years
as Army Reserve Judge Advocate General (JAG); past
President, Tacoma Pierce County Bar Association.
Education: Juris Doctor, University of Puget Sound
School of Law; Qualifi cation, Army Judge Advocate
General School; pending Masters of Strategic Studies,
US Army War College.
Community Service: Founding Trustee, Pierce County
Bar Foundation for volunteer legal services; Trustee,
South Sound Cancer Awareness Research Education
Foundation; many civic clubs.
Statement: Make a difference by choosing the most fair
and experienced candidate. Tom Quinlan is a fair decision-maker with knowledge and balanced experience in
all areas of the law that the Superior Court handles. He
is rated “Exceptionally Well Qualifi ed” by the Tacoma
Pierce County Bar Association and Minority Bar – their
highest ratings.
The Superior Court handles felony crimes and is critical
to ensuring public safety. As a JAG, Lieutenant Colonel
Quinlan is a leader with unmatched experience, prosecuting serious offenders including sexual assault and
domestic violence cases, protecting soldiers and families, and ensuring that our military meets the highest
standards. We can trust Tom Quinlan to keep our communities safe.
Born, raised, and educated here, Tom is committed to
our community. His service includes advocating for
children who are victims of human traffi cking. Tom is
determined to give back to the community that gave him
opportunity.
Endorsements: WA Supreme Court Justice Charles
Johnson, Superior Court Judge Jack Nevin, Sheriff Paul
Pastor, Tacoma Police Offi cers; Gig Harbor Firefi ghters;
State Representatives Laurie Jinkins (D), Dick Muri (R),
and Christine Kilduff (D); County Councilmembers Doug
Richardson (R), Derek Young (D), Joyce McDonald (R);
and over 200 local judges and attorneys.
For More Information:
(253) 312-2856
Tom@TomQuinlanForJudge.com
www.TomQuinlanForJudge.com
end of office
Pierce County Superior Court Dept. 17
127 127 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
City of Buckley
Special Election - Proposition No. 1
Emergency Medical Services Property Tax Levy Complete resolution text at
PierceCountyElections.org
Every sixth year since 1986, voters in the City of Buckley have supported Emergency Medical Services (EMS) by authorizing a 6-year property tax levy used exclusively to fund EMS. The current EMS will expire on December 31, 2016. Rather
than renewal of a 6-year EMS levy, the proposed measure will renew the levy as a permanent levy.
Renewal of the EMS levy will provide funding needed for the City's fi re department to operate an emergency medical
care and services program. Revenue from the levy is used for personnel, training of personnel, equipment, supplies,
vehicles and facilities.
If approved by voters this levy will allow the City of Buckley to continue providing emergency medical care and services,
at the current rate of $0.50 cents per $1,000 of assessed value.
Shall the City of Buckley be authorized to impose a PERMANENT regular property tax levy of fifty cents (50¢) or less per
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of assessed valuation to provide basic and advanced emergency medical care and services?
We encourage you to vote yes to renew our expiring Emergency Medical Services (EMS) levy. Revenue from the
EMS levy is the main source of funding needed to provide
our community with EMT and Paramedic service. Without
EMS levy funding our community will not have this critical
service.
Every 6 years since 1986 voters have supported renewing
our EMS levy. This year we have the opportunity to renew
our expiring 6-year levy as a permanent levy and avoid future election costs of renewing our levy every six years.
We are asked to pass the EMS levy at the same levy rate
that has been in place for the past six years. Passing the
EMS levy is not a new tax; it keeps the same levy in place at
the same tax rate.
Please support our fi re department and their ability to deliver EMS in our community – please vote yes.
Committee Members: William Boyle,
bd_boyle@comcast.net, Bryan Howard, and Devon Boyle
Buckley Cititzens for EMS
 Explanatory Statement
Statement For Statement Against
No statement was
submitted against this issue.
 Ballot Title
128 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Town of Eatonville
Special Election - Proposition No. 1
Emergency Medical Services Levy Complete resolution text at
PierceCountyElections.org
The Emergency Medical Services Levy has been in place for the past ten years. Proposition No. 1 would reauthorize the
Town of Eatonville to continue to impose an additional regular property tax of fi fty cents or less per thousand dollars of
assessed valuation for each of six consecutive years. Washington State law (RCW 84.52.069) allows voters of a town to
approve such an additional regular property tax levy in order to fund emergency medical services. The continuation of
the additional regular property tax would fund the continued emergency medical services provided throughout the Town.
Emergency medical service costs include but are not limited to necessary personnel costs, training for personnel, equipment, structures, vehicles and the supplies necessary to respond to emergencies and provide advanced lifesaving care
to those in need.
Will the Town of Eatonville be authorized to impose an additional regular property tax levy of fifty cents or less per
thousand dollars of assessed valuation for each of six consecutive years solely for the provision of emergency medical
services?
This is not a new Tax! This is a request to reauthorize your
previous approved Emergency Medical Services (EMS) levy
rate of $ 0.50 per $1000.00 assessed valuation
The EMS Levy provides funds to operate and maintain
emergency vehicles and staffi ng EMTs and Paramedics.
With levy support the Town is able to provide (BLS) Basic
Life Support and (ALS) Advanced Life Support service to
your door and transport to local hospitals.
Call volumes for Eatonville Fire and Rescue have increased
more than 15 percent since 2012. The town has been
committed to providing 24/7 well trained and professional
service in your time of need. This was completed with the
Town and with the aid of Pierce Fire and Rescue.
EMS levy monies provide 25% of our total operating
budget. Citizens of the district will receive emergency
transport service to local hospitals without incurring out of
pocket expenses for transport fees.
Committee Members: Tom Smallwood,
tomandkaren@rainierconnect.com, (253) 720-6579,
Bud Lucas, and Gordon Bowman
Eatonville EMS Committee
 Explanatory Statement
Statement For Statement Against
No statement was
submitted against this issue.
 Ballot Title
129 129 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Fire Protection District No. 6 (Central Pierce Fire & Rescue)
Special Election - Proposition No. 1
Emergency Medical Services Property Tax Levy Complete resolution text at
PierceCountyElections.org
The Emergency Medical Services (EMS) levy has been in place throughout the district since the 1980s. Re-authorization of the EMS Levy will continue funding paramedic emergency medical services throughout the District which
also includes the City of Puyallup. Approximately 82% of the District's calls for service are EMS-related. The funds
would be used for personnel, training, equipment, and supplies.
The EMS Levy also funds the EMS Transport Program which pays for citizens of the District to be transported to
area hospitals by fi re department ambulance, with no out of pocket expenses to District residents.
Passage of Proposition No. 1 will continue the current EMS Levy for an additional six years at the current rate of
.50 cents per $1,000 of assessed valuation. At this rate, the owner of a home assessed at $200,000 pays $100 per
year to ensure timely paramedic emergency medical service and ambulance transportation to area hospitals, at no
cost to District residents.
Will Pierce County Fire Protection District No. 6 (Central Pierce Fire & Rescue) be reauthorized to impose regular
property tax levies of fifty cents ($.50) or less per thousand dollars ($1,000) of assessed valuation for each of six (6)
consecutive years to continue funding basic and advanced (paramedic) emergency medical services?
Yes! Funding for essential services needs to be renewed.
This is not a new tax or tax rate increase, but simply a required vote to maintain current funding. Re-authorization
of the EMS Levy will continue funding important paramedic emergency medical services throughout the District.
Yes! Continue funding of EMS Transport Program.
The EMS levy also funds the EMS Transport Program
which pays for citizens of the District to be transported to
area hospitals by fi re department ambulance with no outof-pocket expenses.
Yes! Keep operations fully funded.
The EMS Levy makes up 17% of the department’s operating budget. Without this funding, money must be diverted
to other operating expenses resulting in fewer paramedic
units available to respond, longer response times and all
patients would be required to pay for ambulance transports.
Yes! Support our firefighters and paramedics.
Emergency medical services improves our quality of life
and adds value to our community. Our fi refi ghters and
paramedics are always there for us, so please join us in
voting yes to maintain this vital funding.
Committee Members: Doug Willis, dougjwillis@gmail.com,
Betsy Stubbs, and Gary Hauenstein
Citizens Supporting Emergency Services
 Explanatory Statement
Statement For Statement Against
No statement was
submitted against this issue.
 Ballot Title
130 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Fire Protection District No. 6 (Central Pierce Fire & Rescue)
Special Election - Proposition No. 2
Fire Benefit Charges Complete resolution text at
PierceCountyElections.org
The Fire Benefi t Charge (FBC) has been in place throughout the District since 1991 and currently provides 32% of
Central Pierce Fire & Rescue’s operating budget. Every six years, approval to continue the use of the FBC funding model is required by state law. Support of the FBC for another six years will allow CPFR to maintain response
times and service levels for fi re protection and emergency medical aid calls.
The FBC is calculated based on occupancy type and square footage of structures. It refl ects a direct and proportional assessment of the cost of providing appropriate fi re protection services. Each year the Board of Commissioners reviews the FBC in a public hearing to ensure fi scal responsibility of this funding for the coming year.
Revenue derived from the FBC is restricted by state law to not exceed 60% of CPFR’s operating budget. When the
FBC is in place, state law prohibits imposing an additional property tax of fi fty (50) cents per thousand dollars of
assessed property value for fi re protection services otherwise allowed by law. The District allows certain discounts
for senior citizens and for buildings with approved fi re sprinkler systems.
Shall Pierce County Fire Protection District No. 6 (Central Pierce Fire & Rescue) be authorized to continue voterapproved benefit charges each year for six years, not to exceed an amount equal to sixty percent of its operating
budget, and be prohibited from imposing an additional property tax under RCW 52.16.160?
Yes! Funding for essential services needs to be renewed.
This isn’t a new charge, but simply a required vote to
maintain the current funding model. Central Pierce Fire &
Rescue (CPFR) has managed our tax dollars very well while
delivering superior fi re & emergency medical services to
our communities.
Yes! Keep operations fully funded.
The Fire Benefi t Charge accounts for about 32% of the
district’s operating budget. Failure to renew this funding
model will result in fewer fi refi ghters available to respond,
longer response times, less training and elimination of important prevention and education programs.
Yes! Support our firefighters and paramedics.
Our CPFR fi refi ghters respond to many different types of
emergencies from saving lives to helping an older citizen
up from a fall. These services protect our property and
improve our quality of life, providing value to our communities. Our fi refi ghters and paramedics are always there for
us, so please join us in voting yes in support of them and
maintain this vital funding.
Committee Members: Doug Willis, dougjwillis@gmail.com,
Betsy Stubbs, and Gary Hauenstein
Citizens Supporting Emergency Services
 Explanatory Statement
Statement For Statement Against
No statement was
submitted against this issue.
 Ballot Title
131 131 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Fire Protection District No. 13 (Browns Pt - Dash Pt)
Special Election - Proposition No. 1
Property Tax Levy for Maintenance and Operation Expenses Complete resolution text at
PierceCountyElections.org
Pierce County Fire Protection District No. 13, a fi re district serving the Browns Point-Dash Point area in Pierce County, is
placing a lid lift proposition on the August 2, 2016 ballot. This proposition requests that voters re-authorize the property
tax levy rate of $ 1.00 per $1,000 of assessed valuation. The proposition is presented to provide voters the opportunity to
exceed the limitation imposed by statute, which would otherwise limit regular property tax revenue to 101% of the previous highest lawful tax levy. The dollar amount levied in 2021 shall serve as the district's tax base for purposes of applying the limit factor in subsequent years.
This proposition meets the requirement of RCW 84.55.010, requiring any increase in revenue of more than 1%, over the
previous highest levy, be approved by the voters. The Board is requesting a limit factor of up to 6% increase during the
six years of this levy, but will not actually increase the levy by that amount unless warranted by infl ation.
Approval of this proposition would allow the district to maintain the current level of services. Rejection of this proposition would lead to the loss of substantial tax revenue, which could necessitate cutbacks in services.
The Board of Fire Commissioners of Pierce County Fire Protection District No. 13 adopted Resolution No. 16-290 concerning a proposition to finance maintenance, operations and capital facilities. If approved, Proposition No. 1 will reauthorize
the District to impose a regular property tax levy of one dollar ($1.00) per thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of assessed valuation for collection in 2017 and will authorize up to a six percent (6%) limit factor for each of the five (5) succeeding years
and provide that the dollar amount of the 2021 levy collected in 2022 shall be used to determine future increases as allowed by Chapter 84.55 RCW. Should Proposition No. 1 be approved or rejected?
Our Fire Department needs the communities' help to be
sustainable. We have a large number of deferred maintenance items and imposed mandated expenditures which
our reserves are too low to cover. The 5-year budget
forecast shows an increasing defi cit. The Fire Department's
income is limited by law to only 1% increase per year,
without a vote of the people. The Department's expenses,
like yours, have increased much more than 1%, due to
infl ation.
This Lid Lift will only increase the property taxes on a
$400,000 home by less than $140 per year. We will still be
the lowest taxed staffed fi re district among 14 fi re districts
in Pierce County.
Unlike every other tax we pay, every dollar collected for
the Fire Department stays in our community, benefi ting our
Department, our volunteers, and ourselves.
For additional information, please visit the Department's
website to review 2016 Lid Lift Levy Evaluation at
www.piercefi re13.org.
Committee Members: Dick Collins, usrcollins@aol.com,
(253) 927-9245, Bob Myers, and Kristie Milles
Citizens for A Sustainable Fire Department
 Explanatory Statement
Statement For Statement Against
No statement was
submitted against this issue.
 Ballot Title
132 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Fire Protection District No. 14 (Riverside Fire & Rescue)
Special Election - Proposition No. 1
Excess Property Tax Levy for Maintenance and Operation Expenses Complete resolution text at
PierceCountyElections.org
The Board of Fire Commissioners of Pierce County Fire Protection District No. 14 (Riverside Fire & Rescue) adopted
Resolution No. 2016-316 concerning a proposition to finance maintenance and operation expenses. If approved,
Proposition No. 1 will authorize the District to levy the following excess taxes on all taxable property within the
District to be used for maintenance and operations to maintain the current level of fire and emergency medical
services:
all as provided in Resolution No. 2016-316. Should Proposition No. 1 be approved or rejected?
The Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire Protection District No. 14 (Riverside) has passed a resolution requesting
an election to re-authorize for four years a maintenance and operations property tax levy approved in 2016. The
State’s voters and the State Legislature, respectively, amended the Constitution and the Revised Code of Washington in 2002 to allow maintenance and operation levies for fi re districts for up to four years.
In 1939, the legislature established fi re districts to serve rural areas, rather than urban areas like Riverside. The
regular levy is inadequate to provide fi re, emergency medical and rescue services to a district with more than
3,500 residents. The department and the voters have found it necessary to supplement the regular levy since 2000.
This levy funds about 25% of the department’s budget. By spreading costs over four years, the district is able to
limit the levy to eighty-fi ve (85) cents per thousand dollars of assessed valuation, to be collected annually from
2017 to 2020. The law prohibits any additional tax levies for maintenance and operational support of the district for
this four-year period, if the voters approve this levy.
Riverside Fire and Rescue needs your support for another four years. The maintenance and operations levy
is not a new tax, only a continuation of the supplemental funding provided from our citizens for many years
now. The number of emergency calls in our district
continues to increase. The M/O levy is responsible for
approximately 25% of Riverside’s overall funding and is
imperative to the continuation of meeting our community’s needs for emergency services.
The renewal of the M/O levy will allow us to maintain
our current level of staffi ng as well as guarantee the
quality and dependability of care our community deserves and expects. The M/O levy also allows us to keep
up with operational cost ensuring the proper maintenance of equipment and apparatus.
Your Yes vote will ensure the continuation of quality
emergency services for the community.
Committee Members: Daniel Hugo,
dhugo4229@gmail.com, Brent Dubay, and Chris Leppell
www.riversidefi re.us
Riverside Yes for Emergency Services
 Explanatory Statement
Statement For Statement Against
No statement was
submitted against this issue.
 Ballot Title
Collection Year
2017
2018
2019
2020
Approximate Levy Rate
Per $1,000 of Assessed Value
$0.85
$0.85
$0.85
$0.85
Levy Amount
$131,232
$136,481
$141,940
$147,617
133 133 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Fire Protection District No. 16 (Key Peninsula Fire)
Special Election - Proposition No. 1
Excess Property Tax Levy for Maintenance and Operation Expenses Complete resolution text at
PierceCountyElections.org
The Board of Fire Commissioners of Pierce County Fire Protection District No. 16 (Key Peninsula Fire) adopted
Resolution No. 04-16-639 concerning a proposition to finance maintenance and operation expenses. If approved,
Proposition No. 1 will authorize the District to levy, without regard to the dollar and percentage limitations imposed by chapter 84.52 RCW, the following excess taxes on all taxable property within the District to be used for
maintenance and operations to maintain the current level of fire and emergency medical services:
all as provided in Resolution No. 04-16-639. Should Proposition No. 1 be approved or rejected?
If approved by the voters, the District will establish a maintenance and operations levy in the sum of $800,000 dollars per year for a period of four years. Voter approval would allow the District to renew the 2012 Maintenance and
Operations (M&O) levy and maintain current staffi ng levels and service deliveries. Without this funding a reduction
in staff and other cuts to service will be necessary in 2017.
Such levy will be in addition to the District’s regular and EMS tax levy for a four year period. Based on current
assessed valuations the District estimates that the levy rate necessary to generate these funds in 2017 will be approximately $.39 cents per thousand dollars of assessed valuation. In subsequent years the levy rate will decrease
if assessed values increase.
The cost of operating a fi re department that provides fi re prevention, fi re protection and emergency medical services has increased because of the specialized equipment, personnel training and supplies now required by state
and federal regulations. Approval of this proposition will cost approximately $39.00 dollars per $100,000 of property valuation per year, for four years beginning in 2017 and ending in 2020.
 Explanatory Statement
Support Your Fire Department
Pierce County Fire Protection District 16 needs your support.
Please Vote “Yes” to maintain services as expected by all residence on the Key Peninsula. This levy will renew the existing
M&O Levy and provide suffi cient funding to maintain service
levels. Without this levy, reductions in staffi ng and service
capabilities are expected.
Maintaining Firefighters is Essential to Our Safety
Fire district staff have reduced spending and established goals
for future needs. Volunteers supplement staffi ng and career
personnel are assigned to the Wauna and Home fi re stations
everyday. This levy is necessary to maintain this level of service.
Maintain High Quality Service
By approving this levy your property taxes will simply continue
to show the M&O levy for 4 more years. This is estimated to remain at a cost of $6.50 per month for a home valued at $200,000.
A “yes” is a vote for yourself, your family, and neighbors.
Committee Member: Ruth Bramhall, rbfromvictor@comcast.net
Committee for M&O
Statement For Statement Against
No statement was
submitted against this issue.
 Ballot Title
Collection Year
2017
2018
2019
2020
Approximate Levy Rate
Per $1,000 of Assessed Value
$0.39
$0.39
$0.39
$0.38
Levy Amount
$800,000
$800,000
$800,000
$800,000
134 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Fire Protection District No. 17 (South Pierce Fire & Rescue)
Special Election - Proposition No. 1
Emergency Medical Services Property Tax Levy Complete resolution text at
PierceCountyElections.org
The Board of Commissioners of Fire Protection District No. 17 (South Pierce Fire & Rescue) has passed Resolution
16-006 requesting an election to re-authorize for six (6) years a property tax levy of up to fi fty (50) cents per $1,000
of assessed valuation, to be collected annually from 2017 to 2022. This levy would fund the Emergency Medical
Services (EMS) program, maintaining the current level of EMS service provided to district residents, to include fulltime paramedic employees. The levy would also fund salaries, equipment, and medical supplies needed for EMS
care.
A property tax levy has been in place in District 17 since 1979; the current levy, of fi fty (50) cents per thousand, has
been continuously approved by voters since 2004. The District has created and continued a membership program,
allowing District residents fi re department transport at no out of pocket expense; only non-residents are charged
for transport. If approved, this program will continue.
Approximately 76% of District calls are EMS related. The regular levy does not adequately fund EMS. Revenue
collected by this EMS levy may only be used for emergency medical care or services and related costs. The current
levy will expire on December 31, 2016.
Will Pierce County Fire Protection District No. 17 be reauthorized to impose regular property tax levies of fifty cents
($.50) or less per thousand dollars ($1,000) of assessed valuation for each of six (6) consecutive years to continue
funding basic and advanced (paramedic) emergency medical services?
Proposition 1 is Not a New Tax
It is a reauthorization of an existing six year EMS Levy
which expires at the end of 2016. We must join together
to help our department keep pace with increased demands and rising costs by voting to maintain the existing level of funding at $0.50 per $1,000 of assessed
value.
Over 75% of the 2,355 calls our fi re department responded to last year were for EMS services. Failure to renew
this levy will greatly hinder and possibly prevent District
17 from continuing to provide reliable ambulance service and would result in fewer paramedic units available to respond, longer response times, and all patients
would be required to pay for ambulance transports.
Our goal must be to continue to provide the emergency
services that we authorized with the previous levy.
Please join us in voting Yes to maintain this high quality
of service to our communities.
Committee Members: Michelle Clayton, Janet Dorothy,
and Kevin Stephen, yes4ems17@gmail.com
 Explanatory Statement
Statement For Statement Against
No statement was
submitted against this issue.
 Ballot Title
135 135 The statements above are printed exactly as submitted. No spelling, grammatical or other corrections have been made. The Pierce County
Auditor's Offi ce does not confi rm that the statements printed are true or fact. The candidate or campaign committee is responsible for content.
Fire Protection District No. 21 (Graham Fire & Rescue)
Special Election - Proposition No. 1
Permanent Emergency Medical Services Property Tax Levy Complete resolution text at
PierceCountyElections.org
Since 2002, the citizens of Pierce County Fire District #21 (Graham Fire & Rescue) have supported six-year Emergency Medical Services (EMS) levies at the rate of 50 cents per $1000 of assessed valuation. The passage of the
EMS levy has provided an ambulance membership, which pays for citizens of the District to be transported to hospital emergency rooms by Fire Department ambulance without incurring out of pocket expenses, thus paying only
the insured amount, as allowed by law.
The proposed permanent levy would replace the existing six-year EMS levy, continue ambulance membership
and stabilize funding for EMS. The EMS levy funds will maintain the current level of service which includes crosstrained fi refi ghter, paramedic, and EMT personnel, training, specialized equipment, supplies, vehicles and facilities.
Passage of Proposition No. 1 will make the current EMS Levy permanent at the current rate of 50 cents per $1,000
of assessed valuation. At this rate, the owner of a home assessed at $200,000 pays $100 per year to ensure timely
paramedic response and ambulance transportation to area hospitals. The measure would include citizens' right
of referendum and require separate accounting of all expenditures, updated every two years and available to the
public free of charge.
Will Pierce County Fire Protection District No. 21 (Graham Fire & Rescue) be authorized to impose a PERMANENT
regular property tax levy of fifty cents ($.50) or less per thousand dollars ($1,000) of assessed valuation to fund
emergency medical services?
Life Support and Emergency Medical Services
The Emergency Medical Service (EMS) levies have
been supported by the citizens since 2002. This is not a
new tax. This levy has allowed the continuance of such
services as, ambulance membership, which pays for
citizens of the District to be transported to the hospital emergency rooms by the Graham Fire Department
(Pierce County Fire District #21) ambulance without
incurring out of pocket expenses, hence, paying only the
insured amount. The renewal of the EMS levy will allow
for funds to be used to provide advanced life support
paramedic services. The EMS levy will allow for a citizen
subscription services with no out of pocket cost. The
renewal of the EMS Levy will also help stabilize funding
and plan future services. The EMS Levy is a more cost
effective approach for citizens with fewer election costs.
This would not be a new tax.
Committee Members: Gina Leigh, Bob Benum, and
Dennis Kirstein, yesgrahamfi re@yahoo.com
Graham Fire & Rescue Citizen Group
 Explanatory Statement
Statement For Statement Against
No statement was
submitted against this issue.
 Ballot Title
Pierce County Auditor's Office
2501 S 35th St, Suite C
Tacoma, WA 98409
August 2, 2016
Primary Election

NON-PROFIT ORG
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
TACOMA, WA
PERMIT NO. 19
Ballots will be mailed by July 15.
If you do not receive your ballot by
Friday, July 22, contact us to request
a replacement ballot.
Return your ballot early!
Mail your ballot by July 29, 2016
so it's postmarked by August 2, 2016.
Or, use a postage-free drop box.
(See pages 4 and 5)
Ballot drop boxes close at 8:00 p.m.
on August 2, 2016.
PierceCountyElections.org
pcelections@co.pierce.wa.us
(253) 798-VOTE (8683)
(800) 446-4979